We, the people of Albania, proud and aware of our history,
with responsibility for the future,
and with faith in God and/or other universal values,
with determination to build a state of law, social and democratic, to guarantee the fundamental human rights and freedoms,
with a spirit of religious coexistence and tolerance,
with a pledge to protect human dignity and personhood, as well as for the prosperity of the whole nation, for peace, well-being, culture and social solidarity,
with the centuries-old aspiration of the Albanian people for national identity and unity,
with a deep conviction that justice, peace, harmony and cooperation between nations are among the highest values of humanity,
WE ESTABLISH THIS CONSTITUTION
The independence of the state and the integrity of its territory, dignity of the individual, human rights and freedoms, social justice, constitutional order, pluralism, national identity and inheritance, religious coexistence, as well as coexistence with, and understanding of Albanians for, minorities are the bases of this state, which has the duty of respecting and protecting them.
The Republic of Albania applies international law that is binding upon it.
The organization and functioning of the bodies contemplated by this Constitution are regulated by their respective laws, except when this Constitution provides otherwise.
The election or appointment to or exercise of a public function in one of the organs provided in this Constitution or established by law, notwithstanding the regulation contained in other provisions of this Constitution, shall be prohibited, in case circumstances are established impairing the integrity of the public functionary, under the conditions and rules provided for by law being approved by three fifths of all members of the Assembly.
The system of government in the Republic of Albania is based on the separation and balancing of legislative, executive and judicial powers.
Local government in the Republic of Albania is founded upon the basis of the principle of decentralization of power and is exercised according to the principle of local autonomy.
The life of a person is protected by law.
No one may be subjected to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment.
No one may be required to perform forced labour, except in cases of the execution of a judicial decision, the performance of military service, or for a service that results from a state of emergency, war or natural disaster that threatens human life or health.
Everyone is considered innocent as long as his guilt is not proven by a final judicial decision.
During a criminal proceeding, everyone has the right:
No one may be sentenced more than once for the same criminal act, nor be tried again, except for cases when the re-adjudication of the case is decided on by a higher court, in the manner specified by law.
The freedom and secrecy of correspondence or any other means of communication are guaranteed.
Foreigners have the right of refuge in the Republic of Albania according to law.
Anyone shall be entitled to file an appeal against a judicial decision before a higher court, except if otherwise provided in the law for criminal offences of a minor character, for civil and administrative matters of minor importance or value, according to the conditions provided in articles 17 of the Constitution.
Everyone has the right to be rehabilitated and/or indemnified in compliance with law if he is damaged because of an act, unlawful act or omission from state bodies.
Everyone, by himself or together with others, may direct requests, complaints or comments to the public bodies, which are obliged to reply within the time limits and conditions set by law.
Employees have the right to unite freely in labour unions for the defence of their work interests.
Everyone has the right to be informed about the status of the environment and its protection.
The mandate of the Assembly is extended only in the case of war and for so long as it continues. When the Assembly is dissolved, it recalls itself.
Before beginning the exercise of the mandate, the deputies take the oath in the Assembly.
The first voting takes place not later than seven days from the beginning of the procedure for the election of the President. Each of the other voting takes place not later than seven days from the unsuccessful completion of the preceding voting. A voting is deemed as completed even when no candidates are running in the competition. New candidates may run in the second, third and fourth voting, in accordance with the conditions of point 1 of this article.
If, after the fourth voting, there are no candidates left to compete, new candidates may run in this voting in accordance with the conditions of point 1 of this article. If more than two candidates are proposed to run, the voting takes place between the two candidates that have ensured the highest number of the proposing MPs.
"I swear that I will obey to the Constitution and laws of the country, that I will respect the rights and freedoms of citizens, protect the independence of the Republic, and I will serve the general interest and the progress of the Albanian People." The President may add: "So help me God!"
The President of the Republic cannot hold any other public post, cannot be a member of a party or carry out other private activity.
The President also exercises these powers:
The President of the Republic, in the exercise of his powers, issues decrees.
The President of the Republic cannot exercise other powers besides those recognized expressly in the Constitution and granted by laws issued in compliance with it.
The Prime Minister appointed according to Article 96, Article 104 or Article 105 presents to the Assembly for approval, within 10 days, the policy program of the Council of Ministers together with its composition.
Before the Prime Minister, deputy prime minister, and ministers take the office, they swear before the President of the Republic.
The Council of Ministers, in cases of necessity and emergency, may issue, under its responsibility, normative acts having the force of law for taking temporary measures. These normative acts are immediately submitted to the Assembly, which is convened within 5 days if it is not in session. These acts lose force retroactively if they are not approved by the Assembly within 45 days.
The Prime Minister and the ministers are obligated to stay in office until the appointment of the new Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers appoints a prefect in every region as its representative. The powers of the prefect are defined by law.
The principles and procedures for the issuance of local juridical acts are provided by law.
The Constitutional Court judge shall enjoy immunity in connection with the opinions expressed and the decisions made in the course of assuming the functions, except where the judge acts based upon personal interests or malice.
The Constitutional Court judge shall assume office after swearing in before the President of the Republic.
Being a Constitutional Court judge shall not be compatible with any other political, state as well as any other compensated professional activity, except for teaching, academic, and scientific activities, in accordance with the law.
The judge shall enjoy immunity in connection with the opinions expressed and the decisions made in the course of assuming the functions, except where the judge acts based upon personal interests or malice.
The salary and other benefits of judges cannot be reduced, except when:
Being a judge shall not be compatible with any other political, state as well as any other compensated professional activity, except for teaching, academic, scientific activities, or secondment to justice institutions in accordance with the law.
[Removed]
Being a member of the High Judicial Council shall not be compatible with any other political, state as well as any other compensated professional activity, except for teaching, academic, and scientific activities in accordance with the law.
Being the High Justice Inspector shall not be compatible with any other political, state as well as any other compensated professional activity, except for teaching, academic, and scientific activities in accordance with the law.
The Prosecutor General exercises these powers:
Being Prosecutor General, prosecutor or a member of the High Prosecutorial Council shall not be compatible with any other political, state as well as any other compensated professional activity, except for teaching, academic, and scientific activities in accordance with the law.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Taxes, fees, and other financial obligations, national and local, reductions or exemptions of certain categories of taxpayers as well as the method of their collection are specified by law. In such cases, the law may not be given retroactive effect.
The State can take and guarantee loans and financial credits when so authorized by law.
Principles and procedures for drafting the draft-budget, as well as for implementing it are defined by law.
The High State Audit supervises:
When the Assembly cannot be convened during the state of war, the President of the Republic, with the proposal of the Council of Ministers, has the right to issue acts that have the force of the law, which have to be approved by the Assembly in its first meeting.
Law No. 7491, dated 29.4. 1991, "On the Main Constitutional Provisions" as well as the other constitutional laws are abrogated the day this Constitution enters into force.
This Constitution enters into force with its promulgation by the President of the Republic.
Approved by referendum on 22.11.1998
Promulgated by Decree no 2260, dated 28/11/1998, of the President of the Republic of Albania, Rexhep Meidani.
