The Andorran People, with full liberty and independence, and in the exercise of their own sovereignty,
Conscious of the need to conform the institutional structure of Andorra to the new circumstances brought about by the evolution of the geographical, historical and sociocultural environment in which it is situated, as well as of the need to regulate the relations which the institutions dating back to the Pareatges. shall have within this new legal framework,
Resolved of the need to be endowed with all the mechanisms leading to juridical security in the exercise of the fundamental rights of the individual, which, although always present and respected in the nature of Andorran society, have not received the protection of any kind of general laws,
Eager to use every endeavour to promote values such as liberty, justice, democracy and social progress, and to keep and strengthen the harmonious relations of Andorra with the rest of the world, and especially with the neighbouring countries, on the basis of mutual respect, co-existence and peace,
Willing to bring their collaboration and effort to all the common causes of mankind, and especially to those of preserving the integrity of the Earth and guaranteeing an environment fit for life for the coming generations,
Desiring that the motto "virtus, unita, fortior", which has presided over the peaceful journey of Andorra over its more than seven hundred years of history, may continue to be a completely valid principle and may always guide the conduct of Andorrans,
Approve the present Constitution, in the exercise of their sovereignty.
The Constitution recognises human dignity to be inalienable and therefore guarantees the inviolable and imprescriptible rights of the individual, which constitute the foundation of political order, social peace and justice.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is binding in Andorra.
The Constitution recognises the full legal capacity of the bodies of the Roman Catholic Church which have legal status in accordance with their own rules.
Freedoms of expression, of communication and of information are guaranteed. The law shall regulate the right of reply, the right of correction and professional secrecy. Preliminary censorship or any other means of ideological control on the part of the public authorities shall be prohibited.
The right to privacy, honour and reputation shall be guaranteed. All shall be protected by law against unlawful interference in their family and private life.
Inviolability of the dwelling shall be guaranteed. No one shall enter a dwelling or any other premises against the will of the owner or without a warrant, except in case of flagrant delicto. The privacy of communication shall also be guaranteed, except upon a reasoned court order.
The right to meet and assemble for any lawful purpose shall be respected. The exercise of the right of assembly requires that the authorities be notified in advance, and shall not prevent the free movement of goods and people.
The right to associate for a lawful purpose shall be recognised. A law shall establish a Registry of the associations which may be constituted.
The right to form and maintain managerial, professional and trade-union associations shall be recognised. Without prejudice to their links with international institutions, these organizations shall operate within the limits of Andorra, shall have their own autonomy without any organic dependence on foreign bodies and shall function democratically.
Workers and employers have the right to defend their own economic and social interests. A Law shall regulate the conditions to exercise this right in order to guarantee the functioning of the services essential to the community.
The non-renewal of the residence permit or the expulsion of a lawful resident shall only be decided pursuant to the causes and terms determined by law, after a non-appealable court decision, if the interested person exercises his or her right to jurisdiction.
Everyone with a direct interest has the right to petition the public authorities in the form and with the effects provided by law.
All Andorrans of age, in full use of their rights, enjoy the right of suffrage.
All Andorran nationals have the right of accession to public service and office under the same conditions and in accordance with the requirements determined by law. The exercise of institutional posts is reserved to Andorrans, with the exceptions that may be provided for in this Constitution or in international treaties.
Andorrans have the right freely to create political parties. Their functioning and organization must be democratic and their activities lawful. The suspension of their activities and their dissolution is the responsibility of the judicial organs.
The right of enterprise shall be recognised within the framework of the market economy and in accordance with the law.
All persons have the right to work, to their promotion through work, and to just income which shall guarantee a living befitting human dignity for themselves and their families, as well as to the reasonable limitation of the working day, weekly rest and paid vacation.
The right to health protection and to receive services to look after personal needs shall be respected. With that intent the State shall guarantee a system of Social Security.
The State has the task of ensuring the rational use of the soil and of all the natural resources, so as to guarantee a befitting quality of life for all and, for the sake of the coming generations, to restore and maintain a reasonable ecological balance in the atmosphere, water and land, as well as to protect the autochthonous flora and fauna.
The State may intervene in the ordering of the economic, commercial, labour and financial system to make possible, within the frame of a market economy system, the balanced development of the society and general welfare.
The public authorities shall promote the necessary conditions to implement the right for everyone to enjoy decent housing.
The State shall guarantee the conservation, promotion and diffusion of the historical, cultural and artistic heritage of Andorra.
The rights of consumers and users shall be guaranteed by law and protected by the public authorities.
The State may create media of social communication. In accordance with the principles of participation and pluralism, a law will regulate their organization and control by the General Council.
All individuals and juridical persons shall contribute to the public expenditure depending on their economic capacity, by means of a just taxing system, pursuant to a law and founded upon the principles of generality and equitative distribution of tax burdens.
The State may create by law types of community service to pursue tasks of general interest.
The exercise of the rights recognised in this TITLE may only be regulated by law. The rights of chapters III and IV shall be regulated by means of qualified laws.
In that period the Coprinces, individually or jointly, may send a reasoned message to the Tribunal Constitucional, so that this institution may render judgment on their constitutionality. If the resolution is positive the act may be sanctioned with the signature of at least one of the Coprinces.
The General Budget of the Principality shall assign an equal amount to each Coprince, for the functioning of their services, which amount they may freely dispose of.
Each Coprince appoints a personal representative in Andorra.
In case of vacancy of one of the Coprinces the present Constitution recognises the validity of the mechanisms of substitution provided for in their respective legal systems, so as not to interrupt the normal functioning of the Andorran institutions.
The General Council, which expresses the mixed and apportioned representation of the national population and of the seven Parishes, represents the Andorran people, exercises legislative powers, approves the budget of the State and prompts and controls the political action of the Govern.
The General Council consists of a minimum of twenty-eight and a maximum of forty-two Councillors Generals, half of whom shall be elected in an equal number by each of the seven Parishes and the other half elected on the basis of a national single constituency.
The General Council draws up and modifies its own Rules of Procedure, with a majority vote of the Chamber, it fixes its budget and regulates the statute of the staff at its service.
The General Council may delegate the exercise of the legislative function to the Govern, by means of a law. This function may not be sub-delegated. The law of delegation determines the matter delegated, the principles and directives under which the corresponding legislative decree of the Govern shall be issued, as well as the term of its exercise. The authorization will provide for the parliamentary forms of control of the delegated legislation.
Once a bill has been passed by the General Council, the Syndic General will present it to the Coprinces so that they may sanction it, enact it and order its publication in the Official Gazette of the Principality of Andorra.
For the purpose of furthering the interests of the Andorran people, of international progress and peace, legislative, judicial and executive functions may be relinquished only to international organizations and by means of a treaty which shall be passed by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the General Council.
The Coprinces are informed of the other drafts of international treaties and agreements, and by request of the Govern, they may be associated to the negotiation before their parliamentary approval, if the national interest of Andorra so requires.
The Head of Government is appointed by the Coprinces, after his or her election under the terms provided for in the Constitution.
The Head of Government and the Ministers are subject to the same jurisdictional status as the Councillors Generals.
The Head of Government or, when appropriate, the competent Minister, countersigns the acts of the Coprinces provided for in article 45.
The Head of Government, with the approval of the majority of the General Council, may request the Coprinces to call a referendum about political matters.
The Govern ceases with the dissolution of the legislature, with the resignation, death or permanent disability of the Head of Government, with the approval of a motion of censure or the lack of assent in a motion of confidence. In all such cases the Govern shall continue its functions until the time a new Govern is formed.
In order ensure the economic capacity of the Local Councils, a Qualified Law shall determine the transfer of funds from the General Budget to the Local Councils, and guarantee that one part of these funds be apportioned in equal quantities to each of the Parishes, and the other part to be shared proportionally on grounds of population, extension of their territory and other indicators.
The Local Councils have legislative initiative and are entitled to lodge appeals of unconstitutionality under the terms provided for in the Constitution.
The laws shall take into account custom and usage in order to determine the jurisdiction of Districts and Neighborhoods, as well as their relationship with the Local Councils.
The judicial power is held by the Magistrates, the Magistrates Court, the Criminal Law Court, and the High Court of Justice of Andorra, as well as by the respective presidents of those courts, in accordance with the laws.
Judgments, once final, have the value of res judicata and may not be modified or quashed except in the cases provided for by the law or when, in exceptional cases, the Tribunal Constitucional, after the corresponding process of Constitutional appeal, decides that they were rendered in violation of certain fundamental rights.
In accordance with the laws and notwithstanding the personal liability of those who caused them, the State shall cover the damages for the problems caused by the miscarriage of justice or the abnormal functioning of the Administration of Justice.
The Judges and the Public Prosecution are in charge of police activities related to judicial matters as provided for by the law.
The Tribunal Constitucional tries:
A constitutional appeal against the acts of public authorities impairing fundamental rights may be lodged by:
A Qualified Law shall regulate the legal status of the members of the Tribunal Constitucional, the constitutional proceedings and the functioning of the institution.
The right to initiate the revision of the Constitution shall lie with the Coprinces jointly or a third part of the members of the General Council.
The revision of the Constitution shall require the approval of the General Council by a majority of two-thirds of the members of the Chamber. Immediately after its approval the proposal shall be submitted to ratification in a referendum.
Once the procedure established in article 106 has been carried out, the Coprinces shall sanction the new constitutional text for its promulgation and coming into force.
The General Council and the Govern have the mandate of the Constitution so that, jointly with the Coprinces, they may start negotiations with the governments of France and Spain with the purpose of signing an international three-party treaty which shall establish the framework of relations with the neighbouring States, on the basis of respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Andorra.
The post of diplomatic representation of a State in Andorra is not compatible with the holding of any other public office.
With the coming into effect of this Constitution all previous rules contrary to it are hereby revoked.
The Constitution shall come into effect immediately upon its publication in the Official Gazette of the Principality of Andorra.
And we the Coprinces, after the adoption of the Constitution by the Consell in a solemn session on the second day of February of 1993, and after its approval by the Andorran People in the referendum held on the fourteenth day of March of 1993, make it ours, ratify, sanction and enact it, and, for general cognizance, we do order its publication. Casa de la Vall, the twenty-eighth day of April of 1993
