WHEREAS the People of Antigua and Barbuda-
NOW, THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda:-
This Constitution is the supreme law of Antigua and Barbuda and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if any other laws is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
Whereas every person in Antigua and Barbuda is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, regardless of race, place of origin, political opinions or affiliations, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely-
the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to the aforesaid rights and freedoms, subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released shall be brought before the court within forty-eight hours after his detention and, in computing time for the purposes of this subsection, Sundays and public holidays shall be excluded.
Provided that a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace or an officer of a court or a police officer acting in pursuance of the order of a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace shall not be under any personal liability to pay compensation under this subsection in consequence of any act performed by him in good faith in the discharge of the functions of his office and any liability to pay any such compensation in consequence of any such act shall be a liability of the Crown.
Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the interest in or right to or over the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
and except so far as the provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society;
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence-
Provided that where the foregoing conditions have been complied with, and the court is satisfied that owing to circumstances beyond his control he cannot appear, the trial shall not take place or continue in his absence; or
Nothing contained in or done under the authority of a law enacted by Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of section 5 or section 14 of this Constitution to the extent that the law authorises the taking during any period of public emergency of measures that are reasonably justifiable, for dealing with the situation that exists in Antigua and Barbuda during that period.
and may make such declaration and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 3 to 17 (inclusive) of this Constitution:
Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
Except as is otherwise expressly provided in this Constitution, no law may abrogate, abridge or infringe or authorise the abrogation, abridgement or infringement of any of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual hereinbefore recognised and declared.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution each extension not exceeding three months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a resolution of that House.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Antigua and Barbuda other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and, in section 4 of this Constitution, a court established by a disciplinary law;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means-
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline;
"legal practitioner" means a person entitled to practise as a barrister in Antigua and Barbuda or, except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, entitled to practise as a solicitor in Antigua and Barbuda.
There shall be a Governor-General of Antigua and Barbuda who shall be a citizen appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's representative in Antigua and Barbuda.
A person appointed to hold or act in the office of Governor-General shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of office.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Antigua and Barbuda to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into by any court of law.
The Governor-General shall keep and use the Public Seal for sealing all things that shall pass under the Public Seal.
There shall be a Parliament in and for Antigua and Barbuda which shall consist of Her Majesty, a Senate and a House of Representatives.
Subject to the provisions of section 30 of this Constitution any person who at the date of his appointment-
shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator.
Provided that the President may, at the request of the Senator, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate.
The President, Vice-President or other member presiding in the Senate may request the Attorney-General to attend any proceedings of the Senate if he considers that the business before the Senate in those proceedings makes the presence of the Attorney-General desirable; and where he is so requested the Attorney-General may take part in the proceedings of the Senate solely for the purpose of giving explanations concerning matters before the Senate in those proceedings and he shall not vote in the Senate.
Subject to the provisions of section 39 of this Constitution, any person who at the date of his election-
shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House.
Provided that he shall not be required to vacate his seat so long as he remains an independent member of the House.
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member from time to time, extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of Antigua and Barbuda.
Provided that the election of a President or Vice-President and the election of a Speaker and Deputy Speaker may take place before the members of the Senate or the House, as the case may be, have made and subscribed such oath.
Provided that the President or Vice-President, as the case may be, shall not preside when a motion for his removal from office is before the Senate.
Provided that the speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, shall not preside when a motion for his removal from office is before the House.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of a bill as is referred to in section 47(2) of this Constitution a Speaker or other member presiding in the House who is an elected member of the House shall have an original vote but no casting vote.
Provided that-
whichever is the earlier.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
and is willing to accept the office of Prime Minister.
The Cabinet shall be summoned only by the Prime Minister or, in his absence, by such Minister as the Prime Minister shall appoint in that behalf.
The Prime Minister, every other Minister and every Parliamentary Secretary shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, make and subscribe the oath of allegiance, the oath of office and the oath of secrecy.
Provided that-
The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General regularly and fully informed concerning the general conduct of the Government and shall furnish the Governor-General as soon as possible with such information as the Governor-General, acting in his discretion, may request from time to time with respect to any particular matter relating to the Government.
The powers of the Governor-General under the preceding section shall be exercised by him in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister.
There shall be an Advisory Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy which shall consist of-
Provided that, where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
All revenues or other monies raised or received by Antigua and Barbuda (not being revenues or other monies that are payable, by or under any law for the time being in force in Antigua and Barbuda, into some other fund established for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form a Consolidated Fund.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House and, when the supplementary estimate has been approved by the House, a supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced in the House providing for the issue of such sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the purposes specified therein.
There shall be such provision as may be made by Parliament under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister for the time being responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of monies from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the law, whichever is the earlier.
The House shall, at the commencement of each session, appoint a Public Accounts Committee from among its members, one of whom shall be a member for Barbuda in the House, whose duties shall be to consider the accounts referred to in section 97(2) of this Constitution in conjunction with the report of the Director of Audit and in particular to report to the House-
and any other such duties relating to public accounts as the House may from time to time direct.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection and of subsection (8) of this section.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that-
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection.
Provided that the Commission may, with the approval of the Prime Minister and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, delegate any of its powers under this section to any one or more of its members or to the Commissioner of Police.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General under this subsection in respect of the appointment of any person to act for any member of the commission appointed under paragraph (b) of the subsection (1) of this section.
"the appropriate body representing members of the Police Force" means the Police Welfare Association or such other body representing the interests of members of the Police Force as the Governor-General may designate.
Provided that in the case of any such decision as is referred to in subsection (1)(e) of this section, an appeal shall lie in the first instance to the Police Service Commission if it is so provided by Parliament, in which case the Commission shall have the like powers as are conferred on the Board by subsection (1) of section 108 of this Constitution.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
On and after 1st November 1981 a person shall, for the purposes of any law, be regarded as belonging to Antigua and Barbuda if, and only if, he is a citizen.
The following persons shall become citizens on 1st November 1981-
The following persons shall become citizens at the date of their birth on or after 1st November 1981-
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen by virtue of this paragraph if at the time of his birth-
Provided that such person is not, or was not at the time of the death of the spouse, living apart from the spouse under a decree of a competent court or a deed of separation;
Provided that no application shall be allowed from such person before the marriage has subsisted for upwards of three years and that such person is not, or was not at the time of the death of the spouse, living apart from the spouse under a decree of a competent court or a deed of separation;
Provided that if the person to whom subsection (1)(f) of this section applies is or has been married, the application may be made by that person.
Provided that any law enacted for the purposes of paragraph (d) of this section shall include provisions under which the person concerned shall have a right of appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction or other independent authority and shall be permitted to have legal representation of his own choice.
Any person not already owing allegiance to the Crown who applies for registration under section 114 of this Constitution shall before such registration, take the oath of allegiance.
Provided that in the case of a child born out of wedlock references to the mother shall be substituted for such references to the father.
"father", in relation to a child born out of wedlock and not legitimated, includes a person who acknowledges and can show that he is the father of the child or has been found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be the father of the child;
"parent" includes the mother of a child born out of wedlock.
Subject to the provisions of section 44 of this Constitution, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases-
Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to perform any function in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, the Prime Minister or any other Minister or the Leader of the Opposition or any other person, body or authority or after consultation with any person, body or authority, the question whether the Governor-General has received or acted in accordance with such advice, or whether such consultation has taken place, shall not be enquired into in any court of law.
Provided that-
"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as Parliament may by law prescribe;
"dollars" means dollars in the currency of Antigua and Barbuda;
"financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date as Parliament may prescribe;
"the Government" means the Government of Antigua and Barbuda;
"the House" means the House of Representatives;
"law" means any law in force in Antigua and Barbuda or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Minister" means a Minister of the Government;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"oath of allegiance" means the oath of allegiance set out in schedule 3 to this Constitution;
"oath of office" means, in relation to any office, the oath for the due execution of that office set out in schedule 3 to this Constitution;
"oath of secrecy" means the oath of secrecy set out in schedule 3 to this Constitution;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Antigua and Barbuda;
"the Police Force" means the Police Force established by the Police Act [FN: Laws of Antigua, c. 187.] and includes any other police force established by or under a law enacted by Parliament to succeed to or to supplement the functions of the Police Force;
"President" and "Vice-President" means the respective persons holding office as President and Vice-President of the Senate;
"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service and includes an office of emolument in the Police Force;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office and includes an officer or member of the Police Force;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the government of Antigua and Barbuda;
"session" means the period beginning when the Senate or the House first meets after any prorogation or dissolution of Parliament and ending when Parliament is prorogued or is  dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means in relation to either House of Parliament the period during which the House is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee;
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" means the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House;
Provided that-
Sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 18 and 19.
Sections 1 to 44 and the First Schedule
I, , do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors, according to law.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
I, , do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will honour, uphold and preserve the Constitution of Antigua and Barbuda and the law, that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
I, , do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will not on any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose any counsel, advice, opinion or vote given by any Minister as a member of the Cabinet and that I will not, except with the authority of the Cabinet and to such extent as may be required for the proper conduct of the government of Antigua and Barbuda, directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Cabinet or any matter coming to my knowledge as a member of (or Secretary to) the Cabinet.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
