The Armenian People, accepting as a basis the fundamental principles of Armenian statehood and pan-national aspirations enshrined in the Declaration on the Independence of Armenia, having fulfilled the sacred behest of its freedom-loving ancestors to restore the sovereign state, dedicated to the strengthening and prosperity of the fatherland, with the aim of ensuring the freedom, general well-being, and civic solidarity of the generations, and affirming its commitment to universal values, adopts the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia.
The Republic of Armenia is a sovereign, democratic, social, and rule-of-law state.
In the Republic of Armenia, the power belongs to the people.
The people shall exercise its power through free elections, referenda, as well as through state and local self-government bodies and officials prescribed by the Constitution.
Usurpation of the power by any organization or individual shall be a crime.
State power shall be exercised in accordance with the Constitution and the laws, based on the separation and balance of the legislative, executive, and judicial powers.
Elections of the National Assembly and community councils, as well as referenda shall be carried out on the basis of universal, equal, free, and direct suffrage, by secret vote.
Local self-government is guaranteed in the Republic of Armenia as one of the essential foundations of democracy.
The basis of the economic order in the Republic of Armenia shall be the social market economy, which shall be based on private property, freedom of economic activity, free economic competition, and through the state policy aimed at general economic well-being and social justice.
The foreign policy of the Republic of Armenia shall be conducted on the basis of international law with the aim of establishing good-neighborly and mutually-beneficial relations with all states.
Family, being the natural and fundamental cell of society and the basis for the preservation and reproduction of the population, as well as motherhood and childhood shall be under special protection and aegis of the state.
The Armenian language shall be the state language of the Republic of Armenia.
The capital of the Republic of Armenia is Yerevan.
Human dignity is inviolable.
Everyone shall be equal before the law.
Any discrimination based on sex, race, skin color, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion, worldview, political or any other views, belonging to a national minority, property status, birth, disability, age, or other personal or social circumstances shall be prohibited.
Women and men shall have equal rights.
A human being shall be free to do all that does not violate the rights of others and does not contradict the Constitution and laws. No one may bear obligations that are not stipulated by law.
Everyone shall have the freedom of literary, fine arts, scientific, and technical creation.
Every citizen shall have the right to enter the public service on an equal basis. Details shall be stipulated by law.
Everyone shall have the right to receive the support of the Human Rights Defender, in case of violation of his rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution and laws by state and local self-government bodies and officials or, in cases provided by the Law on the Human Rights Defender, by organizations. Details shall be stipulated by law.
Everyone shall have the right to submit, individually or in community with others, petitions to state and local self-government bodies and officials and to receive an appropriate reply within a reasonable period. Details shall be stipulated by law.
Everyone subject to political persecution shall have the right to seek political asylum in the Republic of Armenia. The procedure and conditions of granting political asylum shall be stipulated by law.
No one shall be obliged to testify about himself, his spouse, or his close relatives, if it can be reasonably presumed that it may subsequently be used against him or them. The law may stipulate other cases of exemption from the duty to testify.
A person accused of a crime shall be presumed innocent until his guilt is proven in the manner stipulated by law by a court judgment that has entered into legal force.
Everyone charged with a crime shall have:
Everyone convicted for committing a crime shall have the right to have the court judgment rendered in respect of him to be reviewed by a higher judicial instance based on the grounds and in the manner stipulated by law.
Every convict shall have the right to request a pardon, including the right to request mitigation of the imposed sentence. Details shall be stipulated by law.
No one shall be convicted for an action or inaction that was not a crime at the time of its commission. A penalty that is more severe than the one applicable at the time of committing the crime may not be imposed. A law that eliminates punishment for an act or mitigates the penalty shall apply retrospectively.
The fundamental rights and freedoms shall extend also to legal persons to the extent such rights and freedoms are by their essence applicable to them.
When regulating fundamental rights and freedoms, laws shall define the organizational structures and procedures necessary for their effective exercise.
In a state of emergency or during martial law, fundamental rights and freedoms of the human being and the citizen, with the exception of those stipulated by Articles 23–26, 28–30, 35–37, Paragraph 1 of Article 38, Paragraph 1 of Article 41, Paragraph 1, the first sentence of Paragraph 5, and Paragraph 8 of Article 47, Article 52, Paragraph 2 of Article 55, Articles 56, 61, and 63–72 of the Constitution, may be temporarily suspended or subjected to additional restrictions in the manner stipulated by law to the extent required by the situation, subject to the international commitments undertaken with respect to derogations from commitments in emergency situations or during martial law.
It shall be prohibited to use fundamental rights and freedoms for the purpose of violently overthrowing the constitutional order or inciting national, racial, or religious hatred, or preaching violence or war.
The means chosen for restricting fundamental rights and freedoms shall be suitable and necessary for the achievement of the aim stipulated by the Constitution. The means chosen for the restriction shall be commensurate to the significance of the fundamental right and freedom being restricted.
When restricting fundamental rights and freedoms, the laws shall define the grounds and scope of such restrictions and be sufficiently certain for the holders and addressees of such rights and freedoms to be able to engage in appropriate conduct.
The essence of provisions on fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in this Chapter shall be inviolable.
Every worker shall, in accordance with law, have the right to healthy, safe, and dignifying working conditions, to limitation of the maximum working time, to daily and weekly rest, and to annual paid leave.
Everyone shall, in accordance with law, have the right to social security in cases of maternity, having many children, illness, disability, workplace accidents, need of care, loss of breadwinner, old age, unemployment, loss of employment, and in other cases.
The main objectives of state policy in the economic, social, and cultural spheres shall be:
Regular and extraordinary elections of the National Assembly shall be set by the President of the Republic.
A parliamentarian shall represent the whole people, shall not be bound by imperative mandate, and shall be guided by his conscience and beliefs.
A parliamentarian may not hold office not stemming from his function in other state or local self-government bodies, or any office in commercial organizations, or engage in entrepreneurial activities or perform other paid work, except for scientific, educational, and creative work.
The remuneration amount and other safeguards of activities of a parliamentarian shall be stipulated by law.
Regular sessions of the National Assembly shall be convened twice a year—from the third Monday of January to the third Thursday of June, and from the second Monday of September to the third Thursday of December.
A sitting of the National Assembly shall have quorum if more than half of the total number of parliamentarians have registered at the beginning of the sitting.
For purposes of discussing certain draft laws, draft National Assembly decisions, draft statements, and draft addresses, as well as matters related to ethics of parliamentarians and of presenting opinions thereon to the National Assembly, temporary committees may be formed by decision of the National Assembly.
In one of the sittings convened during the sittings week of the regular session, if so demanded by at least one quarter of the total number of parliamentarians, deliberations on urgent topics of public interest may be conducted.
By proposal of the Government, the National Assembly may adopt a law on amnesty by majority vote of the total number of parliamentarians.
Marzes and communities shall be the administrative-territorial units of the Republic of Armenia. The administrative-territorial division shall be defined by law upon submission by the Government.
In the event of the impeachment of the President of the Republic, impossibility to discharge his powers, or his resignation or death, an extraordinary election of the President of the Republic shall be held no earlier than 25 and no later than 35 days after the office of the President of the Republic has become vacant.
The President of the Republic may deliver an address to the National Assembly on matters pertaining to his authority.
In the cases stipulated by Article 158 of the Constitution, the President of the Republic shall immediately accept the resignation of the Government.
The President of the Republic shall make changes in the composition of the Government by proposal of the Prime Minister.
In the cases and manner stipulated by law, the President of the Republic shall resolve issues related to the granting and termination of citizenship of the Republic of Armenia.
In the cases and manner stipulated by law, the President of the Republic shall resolve the issue of granting pardon to convicted persons.
In the cases and manner stipulated by law, the President of the Republic shall decorate with orders and medals of the Republic of Armenia and grant honorary titles.
In the cases and manner stipulated by law, the President of the Republic shall award the highest ranks.
If the National Assembly fails, within a three-month period, to elect the respective officials in the manner stipulated by Paragraph 3 of Article 174, Paragraph 1 of Article 177, Paragraph 1 of Article 192, Paragraph 2 of Article 195, Paragraph 2 of Article 197, Paragraph 2 of Article 199, and Paragraph 1 of Article 201 of the Constitution, then the President of the Republic shall appoint temporary acting officials in the manner and based on the grounds stipulated by law until they are elected by the National Assembly.
The President of Republic shall present his resignation to the National Assembly. The resignation shall be deemed accepted from the moment of promulgating it in the manner stipulated by law.
In case of grave illness of the President of Republic or the existence of other insurmountable obstacles to the discharge of his powers, which enduringly render the discharge of such powers impossible, the Constitutional Court shall, based on an application of the Government, take a decision on the impossibility for the President of the Republic to discharge his powers.
In case of impeachment of the President of the Republic, the impossibility for the President to discharge his powers, or the resignation or death of the President, and before the newly-elected President of the Republic assumes office, the powers of the President of the Republic shall be discharged by the Chairman of the National Assembly.
The Government shall be formed within a 15-day period of the appointment of the Prime Minister. After his appointment, the Prime Minister shall within a five-day period propose to the President of the Republic the candidates of the Deputy Prime Ministers and ministers. The President of the Republic shall, within a three-day period, either appoint the Deputy Prime Ministers and the ministers or apply to the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court shall examine the application and make a decision within a five-day period. If the President of the Republic does not fulfill the requirements stipulated by this Article within a three-day period, then the relevant Deputy Prime Minister or minister shall be deemed appointed by virtue of law.
For each year, the Government shall present a report to the National Assembly on the implementation progress and results of its Program.
The Government shall present its resignation to the President of the Republic on the day of the first session of the newly-elected National Assembly, on the day of expressing non-confidence in the Government, on the day of not approving the Program of the Government, on the day of the Prime Minister submitting his resignation, or on the day on which the office of the Prime Minister becomes vacant. The members of the Government shall continue discharging their duties until a new Government is formed.
The bodies of the state administration system shall be the ministries, as well as other bodies subordinate to the Government, the Prime Minister, and the ministries, the powers and procedure of formation of which shall be stipulated by law.
The Public Council shall be a body consultative to the Government. The procedure of the formation and operation of the Public Council shall be stipulated by law.
The Constitutional Court shall, in the manner stipulated by the Law on the Constitutional Court:
Appellate Courts are the judicial instance that reviews the judicial acts of first instance courts within the framework of powers stipulated by law.
The Supreme Judicial Council is an independent state body that shall safeguard the independence of courts and judges.
Yerevan is a community. The peculiarities of local self-government in Yerevan shall be stipulated by law.
In view of public interests, communities may be merged or separated by law. When adopting the respective law, the National Assembly shall be obliged to listen to the opinion of such communities.
Articles 1, 2, 3, and 203 of the Constitution shall not be amended.
Within a three-day period of the Constitutional Court adopting a decision finding that a draft law presented by popular initiative is in conformity with the Constitution, or within a three-day period of the National Assembly adopting a decision to conduct a referendum, the President of the Republic shall set a referendum. The referendum shall be conducted no earlier than 50 and no later than 65 days after setting the referendum.
The act put to a referendum shall be adopted if it is voted for by more than half of the referendum participants, but no less than one quarter of the citizens that have the right to participate in referenda.
A referendum shall not be conducted during martial law or a state of emergency.
The first election of the President of the Republic in the manner stipulated by Article 125 of the Constitution shall be conducted no earlier than 40 days and no later than 30 days before the end of the term of office of the President of the Republic. In the third round of election of the President of the Republic, the candidate who receives the greater number of votes shall be elected as President of the Republic.
On the day on which the newly-elected President of the Republic assumes office, the Government shall submit its resignation. The President of the Republic shall immediately accept the resignation of the Government.
The Constitutional Court chairman and members appointed prior to the entry into force of Chapter 7 of the Constitution shall continue to serve until the end of the term of their office stipulated by the Constitution amended in 2005. After the entry into force of Chapter 7 of the Constitution, nominations for vacant positions of Constitutional Court judges shall be made successively by the President of the Republic, the General Assembly of Judges, and the Government.
The Prosecutor General appointed prior to the entry into force of Chapter 8 of the Constitution shall continue to serve until the end of the term of his office stipulated by the Constitution amended in 2005.
Community mayors and community council members elected prior to the entry into force of Chapter 9 of the Constitution shall continue to serve until the end of the term of their office stipulated by the Constitution amended in 2005. The provision stipulated in the last sentence of Paragraph 4 of Article 182 shall apply after the election of local self-government bodies conducted after the entry into force of the Law on Local Self-Government.
The Human Rights Defender appointed prior to the entry into force of Chapter 10 of the Constitution shall continue to serve until the end of the term of his office stipulated by the Constitution amended in 2005.
The Central Electoral Commission shall be formed under the procedure stipulated by Chapter 11 of the Constitution prior to 1 November 2016. The powers of the Central Electoral Commission members appointed prior to the entry into force of Chapter 11 of the Constitution shall terminate when the Central Electoral Commission is formed.
After the entry into force of Chapters 12-14 of the Constitution, the members of the bodies prescribed by those Chapters shall continue to serve until the end of the term of their office stipulated by the Constitution amended in 2005 and by laws. Members of the Control Chamber shall continue to serve in office as members of the Audit Chamber.
