The Azerbaijan people, continuing the traditions of many centuries of their Statehood, guided by the principles which are reflected in the Constitutional Act on the State Independence of the Republic of Azerbaijan, wishing to provide welfare for all and everyone, and to establish justice, freedom, security, and being aware of their responsibility before past, present, and future generations, exercise their sovereign right by solemnly declaring the following goals:
to guarantee the democratic system within the framework of the Constitution;
to achieve the realization of a civil society;
to establish a law-governed, secular state which assures the supremacy of the law as an expression of the will of the people;
to assure to all a decent level of life in accordance with a just economic and social order;
to live under conditions of friendship, peace and safety with other peoples, maintaining a commitment to general human values and to implement a mutually beneficial cooperation for these purposes.
For the sake of the above stated high intentions, this Constitution shall be adopted through a nationwide referendum.
No one except authoritative representatives elected by the people have the right to represent, speak for and address on behalf of the people.
Executive power is vested in a President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Judicial power is administered by courts.
The Republic of Azerbaijan conducts its relations with other States on the basis of the principles recognized by the universally acknowledged rules of international law.
Natural resources belong to the Republic of Azerbaijan, without damage to the rights and interests of any physical or juridical person.
The Republic of Azerbaijan does not support or provide loans for activities aimed at a mutiny or coup d'etat.
Baku is the capital of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
A person having political and legal relationship to the Republic of Azerbaijan as well as mutual rights and obligations is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A person born on the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan. A person whose one parent is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan is a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Everyone has the right to have his or her case considered in a court specified by law. It is prohibited to have the case considered in another court without his or her consent.
No one shall be convicted repeatedly for the same crime.
Everyone has the right to appeal to a higher court for reconsideration of the verdict passed with respect to him in the procedure specified by law as well as appeal for pardon and for mitigating the punishment.
No one can be forced to testify against himself, wife (husband), children, parents, brother, sister. A complete list of relatives against whom testifying is not obligatory is determined by law.
To protect historical and cultural monuments is the duty of everyone.
Protection of the environment is the duty of everyone.
No one can be compelled to execute responsibilities contradicting the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Violation of the present Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan as well as abuse of rights and freedoms and failure to fulfill responsibilities specified by the present Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Azerbaijan entails liability in the forms determined by law.
The legislative power is exercised by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan consists of 125 Deputies.
The Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan are elected on the basis of majority voting in general, equal and direct elections by way of free, individual and secret voting.
The election results shall be verified and confirmed by the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The first session of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is called no later than one week from the day of confirmation of the authority of 83 deputies of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
If after the confirmation of the authority of 83 deputies of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan is not confirmed by the 10th of March, then the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan determines the time of the first session of Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The rules of termination of the membership to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan are established by law.
The Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan may not be prosecuted for their activity in the Milli Majlis, voting in the Milli Majlis and ideas expressed in the Milli Majlis. Concerning these cases clarifications and evidence can be required only with their consent.
The Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall determine its rules of procedure and establish its bodies, including the election of its Speaker and the Deputy Speakers, the organization of committees and commissions, and the establishment of a counting chamber.
The law and the resolutions shall come into effect from the day of publication if the law or the resolution itself does not specify a different procedure.
The executive power in the Republic of Azerbaijan belongs to the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be any citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan, has been residing in the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan without interruption for more than 10 years, enjoys the right to vote, has never been tried for a major crime, has no commitments towards other States, has benefited from higher education and does not have dual citizenship.
The results of the elections shall be officially announced by the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan within 14 days after the elections.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan has the right of immunity.
The honor and dignity of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be protected by law.
The Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and his family are provided for by the state. Security of the Vice-President of the Republic of Azerbaijan and his family is ensured by special guard services.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan can delegate the authority to the Vice-President, Members of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan and other officials, appointed by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan to sign international interstate and intergovernmental agreements.
When a certain part of the territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been occupied, when a foreign State has declared a war against the Republic of Azerbaijan, a real danger of an armed attack against the Republic of Azerbaijan has been brought into being, a territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan has been blockaded, and if there exists real danger of such a blockade, the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan declares martial law on the entire territory of the Republic of Azerbaijan or in some of its parts and within 24 hours presents the decree to the Milli Majlis to the Republic of Azerbaijan for ratification.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan declares a state of emergency in separate areas of the Republic of Azerbaijan when there are natural calamities, epidemics, epizootics, great ecological and other catastrophes, as well as when there are actions directed at the violation of the territorial integrity of the Republic of Azerbaijan, forced change of its Constitutional system, mass disturbances, accompanied by violence, rise of national conflicts creating threat for life and security of citizens, or for normal activity of State organs.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan within 24 hours presents the decree to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan for ratification.
The President of the Republic of Azerbaijan establishes general rules by way of decree and issues orders to determine other matters.
If a different procedure is not envisaged in decrees and orders, they come into effect from the day of publication.
The Cabinet of Ministers consists of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, his or her Deputy, Ministers and the heads of other central organs of executive power.
On the day when the newly elected President of the Republic of Azerbaijan takes office and assumes the duties of his or her office the Cabinet of Ministers shall resign.
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan presides at meetings of the Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Azerbaijan:
ensures the implementation of the State budget of the Republic of Azerbaijan;
ensures realization of the financial credit and monetary policy;
ensures the execution of the State social program;
guides the Ministries and other central organs of the executive organs, annuls their acts;
settles other matters which are assigned by the President to the competence of the Cabinet.
The appointment to be Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, head of other central body of executive power can be a citizen of the Republic of Azerbaijan, having voting right, with university degree, having no liabilities in other states.
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan, his or her Deputies, Ministers, Heads of other central organs of the executive power cannot hold any other elected or appointed position, they cannot be engaged in business, commercial and other paid activity with the exception of scientific, teaching and creative activity, they cannot receive remuneration other than the position salary and means received for scientific, teaching and creative work.
Hearing of the case behind closed doors can be authorized in case the court assumes that open trial can lead to revealing a State, professional or commercial secret, or when the court deems it necessary to keep a secret of personal or family life.
The Speaker of the Ali Majlis of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic is the highest official of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.
realizes the budget of the Autonomous Republic;
ensures the implementation of economic programs;
ensures social security programs;
deals with other matters attributed to its competence by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Heads of local executive power in the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic are appointed by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the basis of joint presentations by the Speaker of the Ali Majlis and the Prime Minister of the Nakhichevan Autonomous Republic.
The municipalities and municipal servants are responsible for damage caused to human rights and freedoms in the result of the offences or inactivity by municipal servants and their non-provision.
When conflicts arise between normative-legal acts which form part of the legal system of the Republic of Azerbaijan (with the exception of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the acts passed by way of referendum) and international treaties to which the Republic of Azerbaijan is a party, the international treaties shall apply.
Changes to the text of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are adopted only by referendum.
If changes in the text of the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan are proposed by the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan or the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, the opinion of the Constitutional Court on the proposed changes must be obtained in advance.
The Constitutional Court of the Republic of Azerbaijan cannot give an opinion on the changes to the text of the Constitution approved by referendum.
Proposals for a referendum cannot be introduced concerning Articles 1, 2, 6, 7, 8 and 21 of this Constitution, regarding restrictions or the abolition of the rights and freedoms of man and citizen, provided for in Chapter III of the present Constitution, to a higher degree than is provided for by international agreements to which the Republic of Azerbaijan is a party.
Amendments to the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan can be put forward by the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan or at least 63 Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
There cannot be proposed any amendment to the Constitution of the Republic of Azerbaijan regarding the provisions in Chapter I of the present Constitution.
The first meeting of the newly elected Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall be held a week after election of no less than 83 Members of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan. The first session of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan shall last until May 31, 1996.
Article 85' of the Republic of Azerbaijan law "On Elections to the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan" which was adopted on August 15, 1995 shall be in force until the expiration of the power of the Milli Majlis of the Republic of Azerbaijan of the first convocation elected on the basis of the pertinent law.
