We, the people of Bangladesh, having proclaimed our independence on the 26th day of March, 1971 and through a historic struggle for national liberation, established the independent, sovereign People's Republic of Bangladesh;
Pledging that the high ideals of nationalism, socialism, democracy and secularism, which inspired our heroic people to dedicate themselves to, and our brave martyrs to sacrifice their lives in, the national liberation struggle, shall be the fundamental principles of the Constitution;
Further pledging that it shall be a fundamental aim of the State to realise through the democratic process to socialist society, free from exploitation-a society in which the rule of law, fundamental human rights and freedom, equality and justice, political, economic and social, will be secured for all citizens;
Affirming that it is our sacred duty to safeguard, protect and defend this Constitution and to maintain its supremacy as the embodiment of the will of the people of Bangladesh so that we may prosper in freedom and may make our full contribution towards international peace and cooperation in keeping with the progressive aspirations of mankind;
In our Constituent Assembly, this eighteenth day of Kartick, 1379 B.S corresponding to the fourth day of November, 1972 A.D., do hereby adopt, enact and give to ourselves this Constitution.
Bangladesh is a unitary, independent, sovereign Republic to be known as the People's Republic of Bangladesh.
The territory of the Republic shall comprise-
The state religion of the Republic is Islam, but the State shall ensure equal status and equal right in the practice of the Hindu, Buddhist, Christian and other religions.
The state language of the Republic is Bangla.
The Portrait of the Father of the Nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman shall be preserved and displayed at the offices of the President, the Prime Minister, the Speaker and the Chief Justice and in head and branch offices of all government and semi-government offices, autonomous bodies, statutory public authorities, government and non-government educational institutions, embassies and missions of Bangladesh abroad.
his such act shall be sedition and such person shall be guilty of sedition.
his such act shall also be the same offence.
Notwithstanding anything contained in article 142 of the Constitution, the preamble, all articles of Part I, all articles of Part II, subject to the provisions of Part IXA all articles of Part III, and the provisions of articles relating to the basic structures of the Constitution including article 150 of Part XI shall not be amendable by way of insertion, modification, substitution, repeal or by any other means.
The unity and solidarity of the Bangalee nation, which, deriving its identity from its language and culture, attained sovereign and independent Bangladesh through a united and determined struggle in the war of independence, shall be the basis of Bangalee nationalism.
A socialist economic system shall be established with a view to ensuring the attainment of a just and egalitarian society, free from the exploitation of man by man.
The Republic shall be a democracy in which fundamental human rights and freedoms and respect for the dignity and worth of the human person shall be guaranteed and in which effective participation by the people through their elected representatives in administration at all levels shall be ensured.
The principle of secularism shall be realised by the elimination of-
The people shall own or control the instruments and means of production and distribution, and with this end in view ownership shall assume the following forms-
It shall be a fundamental responsibility of the State to emancipate the toiling masses, the peasants and workers and backward sections of the people from all forms of exploitation.
It shall be a fundamental responsibility of the State to attain, through planned economic growth, a constant increase of productive forces and a steady improvement in the material and cultural standard of living of the people, with a view to securing to its citizens-
The State shall adopt effective measures to bring about a radical transformation in the rural areas through the promotion of an agricultural revolution, the provision of rural electrification, the development of cottage and other industries, and the improvement of education, communications and public health, in those areas, so as progressively to remove the disparity in the standards of living between the urban and the rules areas.
The State shall adopt effective measures for the purpose of-
The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to preserve and safeguard the natural resources, bio-diversity, wetlands, forests and wild life for the present and future citizens.
The State shall ensure the separation of the judiciary from the executive organs of the State.
The State shall adopt measures to conserve the cultural traditions and heritage of the people, and so to foster and improve the national language, literature and the arts that all sections of the people are afforded the opportunity to contribute towards and to participate in the enrichment of the national culture.
The State shall take steps to protect and develop the unique local culture and tradition of the tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and communities.
The State shall adopt measures for the protection against disfigurement, damage or removal of all monuments, objects or places of special artistic or historic importance or interest.
The State shall base its international relations on the principles of respect for national sovereignty and equality, non-interference in the internal affairs of other countries, peaceful settlement of international disputes, and respect for international law and the principles enunciated in the United Nations Charter, and on the basis of those principles shall-
All citizens are equal before law and are entitled to equal protection of law.
No citizen shall, without the prior approval of the President, accept any title, honour, award or decoration from any foreign state.
To enjoy the protection of the law, and to be treated in accordance with law, and only in accordance with law, is the inalienable right of every citizen, wherever he may be, and of every other person for the time being within Bangladesh, and in particular no action detrimental to the life, liberty, body, reputation or property of any person shall be taken except in accordance with law.
No person shall be deprived of life or personal liberty save in accordance with law.
Provided that the authority making any such order may refuse to disclose facts which such authority considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
Subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public interest, every citizen shall have the right to move freely throughout Bangladesh, to reside and settle in any place therein and to leave and re-enter Bangladesh.
Every citizen shall have the right to assemble and to participate in public meetings and processions peacefully and without arms, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of public order health.
Every citizen shall have the right to form associations or unions, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of morality or public order:
Provided that no person shall have the right to form, or be a member of the said association or union, if-
are guaranteed.
Subject to any restrictions imposed by law, every citizen possessing such qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law in relation to his profession, occupation, trade or business shall have the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or business.
Every citizen shall have the right, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interests of the security of the State, public order, public morality or public health-
Nothing in this Part shall apply to any provision of a disciplinary law relating to members of a disciplined force, being a provision limited to the purpose of ensuring the proper discharge of their duties or the maintenance of discipline in that force.
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, Parliament may by law make provision for indemnifying any person in the service of the Republic or any other person in respect of any act done by him in connection with the national liberation struggle or the maintenance or restoration of other in any area in Bangladesh or validate any sentence passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered, or other act done in any such area.
if Parliament in such law (including, in the case of existing law, by amendment) expressly declares that such provision is made to give effect to any of the fundamental principles of state policy set out in Part II of this Constitution.
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent amendment, modification or repeal of any such law.
Provided that the question whether any, and if so what, advice has been tendered by the Prime Minister to the President shall not be enquired into in any court.
The President shall have power to grant pardons, reprieves and respites and to remit, suspend or commute any sentence passed by any court, tribunal or other authority.
Provided that notwithstanding the expiration of his term the President shall continue to hold office until his successor enters upon office.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of President or if the President is unable to discharge the functions of his office on account of absence, illness or any other cause of Speaker shall discharge those functions until a President is elected or until the President resumes the functions of his office, as the case may be.
Provided that not less than nine-tenths of their number shall be appointed from among members of Parliament and not more than one-tenth of their number may be chosen from among persons qualified for election as members of Parliament.
[Omitted]
For the purpose of giving full effect to the provisions of article 59, Parliament shall, by law, confer powers on the local government bodies referred to in that article, including power to impose taxes for local purposes, to prepare their budgets and to maintain funds.
The supreme command of the defence services of Bangladesh shall vest in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from delegating to any person or authority, by Act of Parliament, power to make orders, rules, regulations, bye-laws or other instruments having legislative effect.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent a woman from being elected to any of the seats provided for in clause (2) of this article.
for the purposes of this article, he shall not be deemed to acquire the citizenship of a foreign State.
Provided that the Speaker may, before the expiration of that period, for good cause extend it;-
Members of Parliament shall be entitled to such remuneration, allowances and privileges as may be determined by Act of Parliament or, until so determined, by order made by the President.
If a person sits or votes as a member of Parliament before he makes or subscribes the oath or affirmation in accordance with this Constitution, or when he knows that he is not qualified or is disqualified for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of one thousand taka to be recovered as a debt due to the Republic.
but shall not thereby be disqualified for subsequent election as a member of Parliament.
Provided that except the period of ninety days as mentioned in clause (a) of clause (3) of article 123 for remaining term a period exceeding sixty days shall not intervene between the end of one session and the first sitting of Parliament in the next session;
Provided further that in the exercise of his functions under this clause, the President shall act in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister tendered to him in writing.
Provided that at any time when the Republic is engaged in war the period may be extended by Act of Parliament by not more than one year at a time but shall not be so extended beyond six months after the termination of the war.
No Money Bill, or any Bill which involves expenditure from public moneys, shall be introduced into Parliament except on the recommendation of the President:
Provided that in any Money Bill no recommendation shall be required under this article for the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.
No tax shall be levied or collected except by or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
The custody of public moneys, their payment into and the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or, as the case may be, the Public Account of the Republic, and matters connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid, shall be regulated by Act of Parliament, and until provision in that behalf is so made, by rules made by the President.
All moneys received by or deposited with-
shall be paid into the Public Account of the Republic.
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
The following expenditure shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund-
If in respect of any financial year it is found-
the President shall have power to authorise expenditure from the Consolidated Fund whether or not it is charged by or under the Constitution upon that Fund and shall cause to be laid before Parliament a supplementary financial statement setting out the estimated amount of the expenditure or, as the case may be an excess financial statement setting out the amount of the excess, and the provisions of articles 87 to 90 shall (with the necessary adaptations) apply in relation to those statements as they apply in relation to the annual financial statement.
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes for which such grants are made.
the President may, upon the advice of the prime Minister, by order, authorise the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund moneys necessary to meet expenditure mentioned in the financial statement for that year for a period not exceeding sixty days in year, pending the making of the grants and passing of the law.
[Omitted]
Provided that no Ordinance under this clause shall make any provision-
If the office of the Chief Justice becomes vacant, or if the President is satisfied that the Chief Justice is, on account of absence, illness, or any other cause, unable to perform the functions of his office, those functions shall, until some other person has entered upon that office, or until the Chief Justice has resumed his duties, as the case may be, be performed by the next most senior Judge of the Appellate Division.
Notwithstanding the provisions of article 94, if the President is satisfied that the number of the Judge of a division of the Supreme Court should be for the time being increased, the President may appoint one or more duly qualified persons to be Additional Judges of that division for such period not exceeding two years as he may specify, or, if he thinks fit, may require a Judge of the High Court Division to sit in the Appellate Division for any temporary period:
Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent a person appointed as an Additional Judge from being appointed as a Judge under article 95 or as an Additional Judge for a further period under this article.
The permanent seat of the Supreme Court, shall be in the capital, but sessions of the High Court Division may be held at such other place or places as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the President, from time to time appoint.
The High Court Division shall have such original, appellate and other jurisdictions, powers and functions as are or may be conferred on it by this Constitution or any other law.
The Appellate Division shall have power to issue such directions, orders, decrees or writs as may be necessary for doing complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, including orders for the purpose of securing the attendance or any person or the discovery or production of any document.
The Appellate Division shall have power, subject to the provisions of any Act of Parliament and of any rules made by that division to review any judgment pronounced or order made by it.
If at any time it appears to the President that a question of law has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer the question to the Appellate Division for consideration and the division may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report its opinion thereon to the President.
The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the power subject to law to make an order for the investigation of or punishment for any contempt of itself.
The High Court shall have superintendence and control over all courts and tribunals subordinate to it.
If the High Court Division is satisfied that a case pending in a Court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution, or on a point of general public importance, the determination of which in necessary for the disposal of the case, it shall withdraw the case from that court and may-
The law declared by the Appellate Division shall be binding on the High Court Division and the law declared by either division of the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts subordinate to it.
All authorities, executive and judicial, in the Republic shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.
There shall be in addition to the Supreme Court such courts subordinate thereto as may be established by law.
Appointments of persons to offices in the judicial service or as magistrates exercising judicial functions shall be made by the President in accordance with rules made by him in that behalf.
The control (including the power of posting, promotion and grant of leave) and discipline of persons employed in the judicial service and magistrates exercising judicial functions shall vest in the President and shall be exercised by him in consultation with the Supreme Court].
Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, all persons employed in the judicial service and all magistrates shall be independent in the exercise of their judicial functions.
Provided that Parliament may, by law, provide for appeals from, or the review of, decisions of any such tribunal.
[Omitted]
Provided that an Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
The President shall, when so requested by the Election Commission, make available to it such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Part.
There shall be one electoral roll for each constituency for the purposes of elections to Parliament, and no special electoral roll shall be prepared so as to classify electors according to religion, race, caste or sex.
Provided that if the term expires before the dissolution of the Parliament by members of which he was elected the election to fill the vacancy shall not be held until after the next general election of members of Parliament, but shall be held within thirty days after the first sitting of Parliament following such general election.
Provided that the persons elected at a general election under sub-clause (a) shall not assume office as members of Parliament except after the expiration of the term referred to therein.
Provided that in a case where, in the opinion of the Chief Election Commissioner, it is not possible, for reasons of an act of God, to hold such election within the period specified in this clause, such election shall be held within ninety days following next after the last day of such period.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law make provision with respect to all matters relating to or in connection with election to Parliament, including the delimitation of constituencies, the preparation of electoral rolls, the holding of elections, and all other matters necessary for securing the due Constitution of Parliament.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution-
It shall be the duty of all executive authorities to assist the Election Commission in the discharge of its functions.
At any time when the office of Auditor-General is vacant, or the President is satisfied that the Auditor-General is unable to perform his functions on account of absence, illness or any other cause, the President may appoint a person to act as Auditor-General and to perform the functions of that office until an appointment is made under article 127 or, as the case may be, until the Auditor-General resumes the functions of his office.
The public accounts of the Republic shall be kept in such form and in such manner as the Auditor-General may, with the approval of the President, prescribe.
The reports of the Auditor-General relating to the Reports of public accounts of the Republic shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before Parliament.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution Parliament may by law regulate the appointment and conditions of service of persons in the service of the Republic:
Provided that it shall be competent for the President to make rules regulating the appointment and the conditions of service such persons until provision in that behalf is made by or under any law, and rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such law.
Except as otherwise provided by this Constitution every person in the service of the Republic shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
Provision may be made by law for the reorganisation of the service of the Republic by the creation, amalgamation or unification of services and such law may vary or revoke any condition of service of a person employed in the service of the Republic.
Provision shall be made by law for establishing one or more public service commissions for Bangladesh, each of which shall consist of a chairman and such other members as shall be prescribed by law.
Provided that not less than one-half of the members of a commission shall be persons who have held office for twenty years or more in the service of any government which has at any time functioned within the territory of Bangladesh.
Provided that such Proclamation shall require for its validity the prior counter signature of the Prime Minister.
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when Parliament stands dissolved or the dissolution of Parliament takes place during the period of one hundred and twenty days referred to in sub-clause (c), the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which Parliament first meets after its reconstitution, unless before that expiration of the meets after its re-constitution, unless before that expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by Parliament or at the expiration of one hundred and twenty days, whichever occurs first.
While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in articles 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 and 42 shall restrict the power of the State to make any law or to take any executive action which the State would, but for the provisions contained in Part III of this Constitution, be competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetence, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect.
Provided that-
The executive authority of the Republic shall extend to the acquisition, sale, transfer, mortgage and disposal of property, the carrying on of any trade or business and the making of any contract.
All treaties with foreign countries shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before Parliament:
Provided that any such treaty connected with national security shall be laid in a secret session of Parliament.
The Government of Bangladesh may sue or be sued by the name of Bangladesh.
Provided that such person shall not for the purposes of this clause be deemed to hold any such office, post or position by reason only that he holds or is acting in the office first above mentioned.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution all existing laws shall continue to have effect but may be amended or repealed by law made under this Constitution.
The following President's Orders are hereby repealed-
"the Appellate Division" means the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court;
"article" means an article of this Constitution;
"borrowing" includes the raising of money by annuity, and "loan" shall be construed accordingly;
"the capital" has the meaning assigned to that expression in article 5;
"Chief Election Commissioner" means a person appointed to that office under article 118;
"The Chief Justice" means the Chief Justice of Bangladesh;
"citizen" means a person who is a citizen of Bangladesh according to the law relating to citizenship;
"clause" means a clause of the article in which the expression occurs;
"court" means any court of law including Supreme Court;
"debt" includes any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee, and "debt charge" shall be construed accordingly;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means-
"district judge" includes additional district judge;
"existing law" means any law in force in, or in any part of, the territory of Bangladesh immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, whether or not it has been brought into operation;
"financial year" means a year commencing on the first day of July;
"guarantee" includes any obligation undertaken before the commencement of this Constitution to make payments in the event of the profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount;
"the High Court Division" means the High Court Division of the Supreme Court;
"judge" means a judge of a division of the Supreme Court;
"judicial service" means a service comprising person holding judicial posts not being posts superior to that of a district judge;
"law" means any Act, ordinance, order rule, regulation, bye-law, notification or other legal instrument, and any custom or usage, having the force of law in Bangladesh;
"Parliament" means the Parliament for Bangladesh established by article 65;
"Part" means a Part of this Constitution;
"pension" means a pension, whether contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of any person, and includes retired pay or gratuity so payable by way of the return or any addition thereto of subscriptions to a provident fund;
"political party" includes a group or combination of persons who operate within or outside Parliament under a distinctive name and who hold themselves out for the purpose of propagating a political opinion or engaging in any other political activity;
"the President" means the President of Bangladesh elected under this Constitution or any person for the time being acting in that office;
"property" includes property of every description movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, and commercial and industrial undertakings, and any right or interest in any such property or undertaking;
"public notification" means a notification in the Bangladesh Gazette;
"public officer" means person holding or acting in any office of emolument in the service of the Republic;
"the Republic" means the People's Republic of Bangladesh;
"Schedule" means a schedule to this Constitution;
"securities" includes stock;
"the service of the Republic" means any service, post or office whether in a civil or military capacity, in respect of the Government of Bangladesh, and any other service declared by law to be a service of the Republic;
"session", in relation to Parliament, means the sittings of Parliament commencing when it first meets after the commencement of this Constitution or after a prorogation or dissolution of Parliament and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or dissolved;
"sitting" in relation to Parliament, means a period during which Parliament is sitting continuously without adjournment;
"the Speaker" means the person for the time being holding the office of Speaker pursuant to article 74;
"the State" includes Parliament, the Government and statutory public authorities;
"statutory public authority" means any authority, corporation or body the activities or the principal activities of which are authorised by any Act, ordinance, order or instrument having the force of law in Bangladesh;
"sub clause" means a sub-clause of the clause in which the expression occurs;
"the Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of Bangladesh constituted by article 94;
"taxation" includes the imposition of any tax, rate, duty or impost, whether general, local or special, and "tax" shall be construed accordingly.
Provided that in the event of conflict between the Bengali and the English text, the Bengali text shall prevail.
The State Acquisition and Tenancy Act, 1950 (E.B. Act XXVIII of 1951)
The Bangladesh (Taking over of Control and Management of Industrial and Commercial Concerns) Order, 1972 (A.P.O. No. 1 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Collaborators (Special Tribunals) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 8 of 1972)
The Government of Bangladesh (Services) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 9 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Shipping Corporation Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 10 of 1972)
The Bangladesh (Restoration of Evacuee Property) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 13 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Public Servants' (Retirement) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 14 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Abandoned Property (Control, Management and Disposal) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 16 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Banks (Nationalisation) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 26 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Industrial Enterprises (Nationalisation) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 27 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Corporation Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 28 of 1972)
The Bangladesh (Vesting of Property and Assets) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 29 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Insurance (Emergency Provisions) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 30 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Consumer Supplies Corporation Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 47 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Scheduled Offences (Special Tribunals) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 50 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Nationalised and Private Organisations (Regulation of Salary of Employees) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 54 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Jute Export Corporation Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 57 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Water and Power Development Boards Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 59 of 1972)
The Government of Bangladesh (Services Screening) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 67 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Government Hats and Bazars (Management) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 73 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Government and Semi-autonomous Organisations (Regulation of Salary of Employees) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 79 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Insurance (Nationalisation) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 95 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Land Holding (Limitation) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 98 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Biman Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 126 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 127 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Shilpa Rin Sangstha Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 128 of 1972)
The Bangladesh Shilpa Bank Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 129 of 1972)
All Presidential Orders and other existing law effecting amendments of the above-mentioned Act and Orders.
[Omitted]
An oath (or affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the Speaker-
"I,........................................., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of President of Bangladesh according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution: And that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will."
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
Oaths (or affirmations) in the following forms shall be administered by the President-
"I ........................, do solemnly swear (or Affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of Prime Minister (or as the case may be) according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; That I will Preserve, protect and defend the Constitution: And That I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear of favour, affection or ill-will."
"I, ........................, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Prime Minister (or as the case may be) except as may be required for the due discharge of my duty as Prime Minister (or as the case may be)."
[Omitted]
An Oath (or affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the president
"I , ..............., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the Speaker of Parliament and (whenever I am called upon so to do) of the President, according to law; That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh; That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution; And that I will do right to all manner of People according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will."
An oath (or affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the President
"I, ....................., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties or Deputy Speaker or Parliament and (whenever I am called upon so to do) of the Speaker, according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution: And that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
An oath (or affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the Speaker-
"I, ............................., having been elected a member of Parliament do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: And that I will not allow my personal interest to influence the discharge of my duties as a member of Parliament."
An oath (or affirmation) in the following forms shall be administered, in the case of the Chief Justice by the President, and in the case of a Judge appointed to a division, by the Chief Justice-
"I, ............., having been appointed Chief Justice of Bangladesh (or Judge of the Appellate/High Court Division of the Supreme Court) do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and the laws of Bangladesh: And that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear of favour, affection or ill-will."
An oath (or Affirmation) in the following from shall be administered by the Chief Justice-
"I, ............................, having been appointed Chief Election Commissioner (or Election Commissioner), do solemnly swear (or Affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution: And that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions."
An oath (or Affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the Chief Justice-
"I, ...................., having been appointed Comptroller and Auditor-General do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution: And that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions."
An oath (or Affirmation) in the following form shall be administered by the Chief Justice-
"I, ......................., having been appointed Chairman (or Member) of a Public Service Commission do solemnly swear (or Affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office according to law: That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Bangladesh: That I will preserve, protect and defend the Commission: And That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions."
Upon the commencement of this Constitution, the Constitution Assembly, having discharged its responsibility of framing a Constitution for the Republic, shall stand dissolved.
Provided that provision may be made by law to give effect to the provision relating to seats women members referred to in clause (3) of articles 65.
[Omitted]
Provided that the holding of office under this paragraph shall not be taken into account for the purposes of clause (2) of article 50.
The person holding office as Prime Minister, immediately before the date of the commencement of this Constitution shall until his successor appointed under article 56 after the first general election held under this Constitution enters upon office, hold office as Prime Minister as if appointed to that office under this Constitution, and the persons holding office as Ministers immediately before that date shall continue to hold office as Ministers until the Prime Minister otherwise directs, and nothing in article 56 shall prevent the appointment of other Ministers on the advice of the Prime Minister.
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
An Appeal to the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court shall lie, notwithstanding any limitation as to time, against any judgment, decree, order or sentence delivered, issued or pronounced since the 1st day of March, 1971 by any High Court of Bangladesh (Amendment) Order, 1972 (P.O. No. 91 of 1972) functioning in the territory of Bangladesh:
Provided that article 103 shall apply in respect of any such appeal as it applies in respect of appeals from the High Court Division;
Provided further that no appeal under this article shall be lodged after the expiration of the period of ninety days from the commencement of this Constitution.
Any person who, under this Schedule, is continued in an office in respect of which a form of oath or affirmation is set out in the Third Schedule shall, as soon as practicable after the commencement of this Constitution, make and subscribe before the appropriate person an oath or affirmation in that form.
Until elections are held to constitute the local government bodies referred to in article 59, the administrative arrangements existing in the different administrative units of the Republic immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue, subject to such changes as may be made by law.
All taxes and fees imposed under any law in force in Bangladesh immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue to be imposed but may be varied or abolished by law.
Unless Parliament otherwise resolves, the Provisions of articles 87, 89, 90 and 91 of this Constitution shall not have effect in respect of the financial year current at the commencement of this Constitution, and expenditure defrayed during that year out of the Consolidated Fund or the Public Account of the Republic shall be deemed to have been validly incurred:
Provided that the President shall, as soon as is practicable, cause a statement of all such expenditure, authenticated by his signature, to be laid before Parliament.
The powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General under this Constitution shall apply in respect of all accounts relating to the financial year current at the commencement of this condition and to earlier years and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to such accounts shall be submitted to the President who shall cause them to be laid before Parliament.
Provided that no such order shall be made after the first meeting of the Parliament constituted under this Constitution.
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
[Omitted]
My brothers,
I have come before you today with a heart laden with sadness. You are aware of everything and know all. We have tried with our lives. And yet the sadness remains that today, in Dhaka, Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi and Rangpur the streets are soaked in the blood of my brothers. Today the people of Bengal desire emancipation, the people of Bengal wish to live, the people of Bengal demand that their rights be acknowledged.
What wrong have we committed? Following the elections, the people of Bangladesh entrusted me and the Awami League with the totality of their electoral support. It was our expectation that the Parliament would meet, there we would frame our Constitution, that we would develop this land, that the people of this country would achieve their economic, political and cultural freedom. But it is a matter of grief that today we are constrained to say in all sadness that the history of the past twenty three years has been the history of a persecution of the people of Bengal, a history of the blood of the people of Bengal. This history of the past twenty three years has been one of the agonising cries of men and women.
The history of Bengal has been a history where the people of this land have made crimson the streets and highways of this land with their blood. We gave blood in 1952; in 1954, we won the elections and yet were not permitted to exercise power. In 1958, Ayub Khan imposed Martial Law and kept the nation in a state of slavery for ten long years. On 7 June 1966, as they rose in support of the Six-Point movement, the sons of my land were mown down in gunfire. When Yahya Khan took over once Ayub Khan fell in the fury of the movement of 1969, he promised that he would give us a Constitution, give us democracy. We put our faith on him. And then history moved a long way, the elections took place. I have met President Yahya Khan. I appealed to him, not just as the majority leader in Bengal but also as the majority leader in Pakistan, to convene the National Assembly on 15 February. He did not pay heed to my appeal. He paid heed to Mr. Bhutto. And he said that the assembly would be convened in the first week that we would discuss matters in the Assembly. I even went to the extent of suggesting that despite our being in a majority, if anyone proposes anything that is legitimate and right, we would accept his proposal.
Mr. Bhutto came here. He held negotiations with us, and when he left, he said that the door to talk had not closed, that more discussions would take place. After that, I spoke to other political leaders. I told them to join me in deliberations so that we could give shape to a Constitution for the country. But Mr. Bhutto said that if members elected from West Pakistan came here, the Assembly would turn into a slaughter house, an abattoir. He warned that anyone who went to the Assembly would end up losing his life. He issued dire warnings of closing down all the shop from Peshawar to Karachi if the Assembly Session went ahead. I said that the Assembly Session would go ahead. And then, suddenly, on the first of March the Assembly Session was put off. Mr. Yahya Khan, in exercise of his powers as president, had called the National Assembly into Session; and I had said that I would go to the Assembly. Mr. Bhutto said he would not go. Thirty five members came here from West Pakistan. And suddenly the Assembly was put off. The blame was placed squarely on the people of Bengal, the blame was put at my door. Once the Assembly meeting was postponed, the people of this land decided to put up resistance to the act.
I enjoined upon them to observe a peaceful general strike. I instructed them to close down all factories and industrial installations. The people responded positively to my directives. Through sheer spontaneity they emerged on to the streets. They were determined to pursue their struggle through peaceful means.
What have we attained? The weapons we have bought with our money to defend the country against foreign aggression are being used against the poor and down-trodden of my country today. It is their hearts the bullets pierce today. We are the majority in Pakistan. Whenever we Bengalis have attempted to ascend to the heights of power, they have swooped upon us.
I have spoken to him over telephone. I told him, Mr. Yahya Khan, you are the President of Pakistan. Come, be witness to the inhuman manner in which the people of my Bengal are being murdered, to the way in which the mothers of my land are being deprived of their sons." I told him, "come, see and dispense justice". But he construously said that I had agreed to participate in a Round Table Conference to be held on 10 March. I have already said a long time ago, what RTC? With whom do I sit down to talk? Do I fraternise with those have taken the blood of my people? All of a sudden, without discussing matters with me and after a secret meeting lasting five hours, he has delivered a speech in which he has placed all responsibility for the impasse on me, on the people of Bengal.
My brothers,
They have called the Assembly for the twenty-fifth. The marks of blood have not yet dried up. I said on the tenth that Mujibur Rahman would not walk across that blood to take part in a Round Table Conference. You have called the Assembly. But my demands must be met first. Martial Law must be withdrawn. All military personnel must be taken back to the barracks. An inquiry must be conducted into the manner in which the killings have been caused. And power must be transferred to the elected representatives of the people. And only then shall we consider the question of whether or not to sit in the National Assembly. Prior to the fulfilment of our demands, we cannot take part in the Assembly.
I do not desire the office of Prime Minister. I wish to see the rights of the people of this country established. Let me make it clear, without ambiguity, that beginning today, in Bangladesh, all courts, magistracies, government offices and educational institutions will remain closed for an indefinite period. In order that the poor do not suffer, in order that my people do not go through pain, all other activities will continue, will not come within the ambit of the general strike from tomorrow. Rickshaws, horse carriages, trains and river vessels will ply. The Supreme Court, High Court, Judge's Court, semi-government offices, WAPDA,-nothing will work. Employees will collect their salaries on the twenty-eighth. But if the salaries are not paid, if another bullet is fired, if any more of the people are murdered, it is my directive to all of you: turn every house into a fortress, resist the enemy with everything you have. And for the sake of life, even if I am not around to guide you, direct you, close off all roads and pathways.
We will strive them into submission. We will submerge them in water. You are our brothers. Return to your barracks and no harm will come to you. But do not try to pour bullets into my heart again. You cannot keep seventy five million people in bondage. Now that we have learnt to die, no power on earth can keep us in subjugation.
For those who have embraced martyrdom, and for those who have sustained injuries we in the Awami League will do all we can to relieve their tragedy. Those among you who can please lend a helping hand through contributing to our relief committee. The owners of industries will make certain that the wages of workers who have taken part in the strike for the past week are duly paid to them. I shall tell employees of the government, my word must be heard, and my instructions followed. Until freedom comes to my land, all taxes will be held back from payment. No one will pay them. Bear in mind that the enemy has infiltrated our ranks to cause confusion and sow discord among us. In our Bengal, everyone, be the Hindu or Muslim, Bengali or non-Bengali, is our brother. It is our responsibility to ensure their security. Our good name must not be sullied.
And remember, employees at radio and television, if radio does not get our message across, no Bengali will go to the radio station. If television does not put forth our point of view, no Bengali will go to television. Banks will remain open for two hours to enable people to engage in transactions. But there will be no transfer of even a single penny from East Bengal to West Pakistan. Telephone and telegram services will continue in East Bengal and news can be despatched overseas.
But if moves are made to exterminate the people of this country, Bengalis must act with caution. In every village, every neighbourhood, set up Sangram Parishad under the leadership of the Awami League. And be prepared with whatever you have. Remember: Having mastered the lesson of sacrifice, we shall give more blood. God willing, we shall free the people of this land. The struggle this time is a struggle for emancipation. The struggle this time is a struggle for independence.
Joi Bangla!
BY THE FATHER OF THE NATION, BANGABANDHU SHEIKH MUJIBUR RAHA-MAN SHORTLY AFTER MIDNIGHT OF 25TH MARCH, i.e. EARLY HOURS OF 26TH MARCH, 1971
"This may be my last message, from today Bangladesh is independent. I call upon the people of Bangladesh wherever you might be and with whatever you have, to resist the army of occupation to the last. Your fight must go on until the last soldier of the Pakistan occupation army is expelled from the soil of Bangladesh and final victory is achieved.
Sheik Mujibur Rahman
26 March 1971"
MUJIBNAGAR, BANGLADESH
Dated 10th day of April, 1971.
WHEREAS free elections were held in Bangladesh from 7th December, 1970 to 17th January, 1971, to elect representatives for the purpose of framing a Constitution,
AND WHEREAS at these elections the people of Bangladesh elected 167 out of 169 representatives belonging to the Awami League,
AND WHEREAS General Yahya Khan summoned the elected representatives of the people to meet on the 3rd March, 1971, for the purpose of framing a Constitution,
AND WHEREAS the Assembly so summoned was arbitrarily and illegally postponed for an indefinite period,
AND WHEREAS instead of fulfilling their promise and while still conferring with the representatives of the people of Bangladesh, Pakistan authorities declared an unjust and treacherous war,
AND WHEREAS in the facts and circumstances of such treacherous conduct Banga Bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman, the undisputed leader of 75 million of people of Bangladesh, in due fulfilment of the legitimate right of self-determination of the people of Bangladesh, duly made a declaration of independence at Dacca on March 26, 1971, and urged the people of Bangladesh to defend the honour and integrity of Bangladesh,
AND WHEREAS in the conduct of a ruthless and savage war the Pakistani authorities committed and are still continuously committing numerous acts of genocide and unprecedented tortures, amongst others on the civilian and unarmed people of Bangladesh,
AND WHEREAS the Pakistan Government by levying an unjust war and committing genocide and by other repressive measures made it impossible for the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh to meet and frame a Constitution, and give to themselves a Government,
AND WHEREAS the people of Bangladesh by their heroism, bravery and revolutionary fervour have established effective control over the territories of Bangladesh,
We the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh, as honour bound by the mandate given to us by the people of Bangladesh whose will is supreme duly constituted ourselves into a Constituent Assembly, and
in order to ensure for the people of Bangladesh equality, human dignity and social justice,
declare and constitute Bangladesh to be a sovereign People's Republic and thereby confirm the declaration of independence already made by Banga Bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman, and
do hereby affirm and resolve that till such time as a Constitution is framed, Banga Bandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahaman shall be the President of the Republic and that Syed Nazrul Islam shall be the Vice-President of the Republic, and
that the President shall be the Supreme Commander of all the Armed Forces of the Republic,
shall exercise all the Executive and Legislative powers of the Republic including the power to grant pardon,
shall have the power to appoint a Prime Minister and such other Ministers as he considers necessary,
shall have the power to levy taxes and expend monies,
shall have the power to summon and adjourn the Constituent Assembly, and
do all other things that may be necessary to give to the people of Bangladesh and orderly and just Government.
We the elected representatives of the people of Bangladesh do further resolve that in the event of there being no President or the President being unable to enter upon his office or being unable to exercise his powers due to any reason whatsoever, the Vice-President shall have and exercise all the powers, duties and responsibilities herein conferred on the President,
We further resolve that we undertake to observe and give effect to all duties and obligations that devolve upon us as a member of the family of nations and to abide by the Charter of the United Nations.
We further resolve that this Proclamation of Independence shall be deemed to have come into effect from 26th day of March, 1971.
We further resolve that in order to give effect to this instrument we appoint Prof. Yusuf Ali our duly Constituted potentiary and to give to the President and the Vice-President oaths of office.
PROF. YUSUF ALI
Duly Constituted Potentiary
By and under the authority of the Constituent Assembly of Bangladesh.
