Whereas the love of free institutions and of independence has always strongly characterised the inhabitants of Barbados:
And Whereas the Governor and the said inhabitants settled a Parliament in the year 1639:
And Whereas as early as 18th February, 1651 those inhabitants, in their determination to safeguard the freedom, safety and well-being of the Island, declared, through their Governor, Lords of the Council and members of the Assembly, their independence of the Commonwealth of England:
And Whereas the rights and privileges of the said inhabitants were confirmed by articles of agreement, commonly known as the Charter of Barbados, had, made and concluded on 11th January, 1652 by and between the Commissioners of the Right Honourable the Lord Willoughby of Parham, Governor, of the one part, and the Commissioners on behalf of the Commonwealth of England, of the other part, in order to the rendition to the Commonwealth of England of the said Island of Barbados:
And Whereas with the broadening down of freedom the people of Barbados have ever since then not only successfully resisted any attempt to impugn or diminish those rights and privileges so confirmed, but have consistently enlarged and extended them:
Now, therefore, the people of Barbados
shall become a citizen of Barbados on 30th November 1966.
shall be entitled, upon making application, and, if she is a British protected person or an alien, upon taking the oath of allegiance, to be registered as a citizen of Barbados.
shall be entitled, upon making application, to be registered as a citizen of Barbados.
Provided that such an application may not be made by a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years and is not a woman who is or has been married, but shall be made on behalf of that person by a parent or guardian of that person.
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Barbados by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth—
shall be entitled to renounce his citizenship of Barbados by a declaration made and registered in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that
"British protected person" means a person who is a British protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1948;
"prescribed" means prescribed by or under any Act of Parliament.
the following provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought before a court as soon as is reasonably practicable; and if any person arrested or detained upon reasonable suspicion of his having committed or being about to commit a criminal offence is not tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings which may be brought against him, he shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to trial.
Provided that in reckoning any period of thirty days for the purposes of this subsection no account shall be taken of any period during which Parliament stands prorogued or dissolved.
in relation to persons so in prison or so detained.
and, except with his consent, the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered the trial to proceed in his absence.
and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 12 to 23:
Provided that the High Court shall not exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
including provision with respect to the time within which any application, reference or appeal shall or may be made or brought; and, subject to any provision so made, provision may be made with respect to the matters aforesaid by rules of court.
Provided that any such proclamation may be extended from time to time for a further period not exceeding six months by resolution passed in like manner, and may be revoked at any time by resolution supported by the votes of a majority of all the members of the House of Assembly.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Barbados, other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes the Caribbean Court of Justice and–
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means–
"legal representative", in relation to any court or other tribunal, means a person entitled to practise as an attorney-at-law before such court or tribunal; and
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, by instrument under the Public Seal, appoint any person in Barbados to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in that instrument.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to or observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into in any court.
Provided that-
Provided that before appointing any person under this subsection the Governor-General shall consult such persons as, in his discretion, he considers can speak for those interests and ought to be consulted.
shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator.
Provided that the President of the Senate may, at the request of the said Senator from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate.
Provided that the President shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a Senator on a dissolution of Parliament, until the Senate first meets after such dissolution;
shall not be inquired into in any court.
shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House of Assembly.
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House of Assembly.
shall be determined by the High Court, whose decision shall be final.
shall be determined by such authority or authorities as may be prescribed by any law in force in Barbados.
shall not be passed in either House unless at the final voting thereon in the House it is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House.
Provided that the person presiding shall not vote unless on any question the votes are equally divided, in which case he shall have and exercise a casting vote.
Provided that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not have effect unless at least seven months have elapsed between the date on which the Bill is passed by the House of Assembly in the first session and the date on which it is passed by the House of Assembly in the second session.
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister is vacant and the Governor-General considers that there is no prospect of his being able within a reasonable time to appoint to that office a person who can command the confidence of a majority of the members of the House of Assembly, he shall dissolve Parliament.
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than two years.
Provided that this subsection shall have effect in relation to any period between a dissolution of Parliament and the day on which the next election of members of the House of Assembly is held as if Parliament had not been dissolved.
Provided that one such other Minister (who shall be styled Attorney-General) shall be assigned the functions of principal legal adviser to the Government.
Provided that this subsection shall have effect in relation to any period between a dissolution of Parliament and the day on which the next election of members of the House of Assembly is held as if Parliament had not been dissolved.
Provided that this subsection shall have effect in relation to any period between a dissolution of Parliament and the day on which the next election of members of the House of Assembly is held as if Parliament had not been dissolved.
Provided that, except during any period such as is mentioned in subsection (3) (a), if the Governor-General considers that it is doubtful whether a person commands such support as is mentioned in subsection (2) he shall, in determining the question, act in accordance with the advice of the Speaker.
Provided that, where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
"Court" means the Caribbean Court of Justice;
"Regional Judicial and Legal Services Commission" or “Commission” means the Commission established by Article V of the Agreement;
"Treaty" means the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas establishing the Caribbean Community, including the CARICOM Single Market and Economy,
which shall exercise jurisdiction under this Constitution or any other law.
concerning the interpretation and application of the Treaty;
whichever is the earlier.
the President or other Judge of the Court may sit as a Judge for the purpose of delivering judgment or doing any other thing in relation to proceedings which were commenced before him before he attained that age or, as the case may be, retired or resigned.
Provided that a person who has been appointed as a Judge may continue in office notwithstanding any subsequent variations in the qualifications so prescribed.
to continue in office until he has attained, in the case of a Judge of the High Court such later age, not exceeding sixty-seven years and, in the case of any other Judge, such later age, not exceeding seventy-two years, as may have been agreed between the Governor-General and the Judge of the High Court or other Judge.
a person may sit as a Judge for the purpose of delivering judgment or doing any other thing in relation to proceedings which were commenced before him before he attained that age or, as the case may be, retired or resigned.
to the Caribbean Court of Justice, either as of right or with the leave of the said Court of Appeal or other court, as the case may be, in such cases other than those referred to in section 87(2) as may be prescribed by Parliament.
Provided that if, whenever an occasion arises for the appointment of an appointed member, the Governor-General, acting as aforesaid, is satisfied that there is no suitable person who is or has been such a judge available and willing to be appointed, he may appoint a person who has been entitled to practise in Barbados as an attorney-at-law for not less than ten years but is not in active practice as an attorney-at-law.
Provided that the Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Commission, may nevertheless suspend that officer from performing the functions of his office pending the determination of the reference to the Privy Council.
Provided that the Governor-General, acting on the recommendation of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission, may permit a Director who has attained the age of sixty-two years to continue in office until he has attained such later age, not exceeding sixty-five years, as may have been agreed between the Governor-General and the Director. t
the Judicial and Legal Service Commission;
shall not be enquired into in any court.
"the Commonwealth" means Barbados, any country to which section 8 applies and any dependency of any such country;
"the Consolidated Fund" means the Consolidated Fund established by section 107;
"House" means the Senate or the House of Assembly, as the context may require;
"Judge" means the Chief Justice, a Justice of Appeal and a Judge of the High Court;
"law" includes any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law;
"oath of allegiance" means the oath of allegiance set out in the First Schedule;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Barbados;
"Police Force" means the Royal Barbados Police Force established under the Police Act, 1961l;
"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means the holder of any public office and includes any person appointed to act in any such office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of subsection (7), the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the government of Barbados;
"session" means, in relation to Parliament, the sittings of Parliament commencing when it first meets after this Constitution comes into force or after the prorogation or dissolution of Parliament at any time and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means in relation to a House, a period during which that House is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which the House is in committee;
"Speaker" and “Deputy Speaker” mean the member of the House of Assembly from time to time elected by that House to be respectively Speaker or Deputy Speaker of that House.
Provided that-
Oath of Allegiance
I, , do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Her Heirs and Successors, according to law. So help me God.
Oath for the due execution of the office of Governor-General.
I, , do swear that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Her Heirs and Successors, in the office of Governor-General. So help me God.
Oath for the due execution of the office of Prime Minister or other Minister or Parliamentary Secretary.
I, , being appointed Prime Minister/Minister/Parliamentary Secretary, do swear that I will to the best of my judgment, at all times when so required, freely give my counsel and advice to the Governor-General (or any other person for the time being lawfully performing the functions of that office) for the good management of the public affairs of Barbados, and I do further swear that I will not on any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose the counsel, advice, opinion or vote of any particular Minister or Parliamentary Secretary and that I will not, except with the authority of the Cabinet and to such extent as may be required for the good management of the affairs of Barbados, directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Cabinet or the nature or contents of any documents communicated to me as Prime Minister/Minister/Parliamentary Secretary or any matter coming to my knowledge in my capacity as such, and that in all things I will be a true and faithful Prime Minister/Minister/Parliamentary Secretary. So help me God.
Oath for the due execution of the office of Director of Public Prosecutions.
I, , do swear that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, Her Heirs and Successors, in the office of Director of Public Prosecutions. So help me God.
Judicial Oath
I, , do swear that I will well and truly serve Our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth II, Her Heirs and Successors, in the office of the Chief Justice/Justice of Appeal/Judge of the High Court and I will do right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of Barbados without fear or favour, affection or ill will. So help me God.
Judicial Oath for Judges of the Caribbean Court of Justice
I, , do hereby swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully exercise the office of President/Judge of the Caribbean Court of Justice without fear or favour, affection or ill will and in accordance with the Code of Judicial Conduct. (So help me God (to be omitted in affirmation)).
Provided that the electorate in any constituency shall, so far as practicable, not exceed 115%, nor be less than 85%, of the total electorate divided by the number of constituencies.
