WHEREAS the people of Belize-
NOW, THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Belize:
Whereas every person in Belize is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely-
the provisions of this Part shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any person does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought before a court without undue delay and in any case not later than forty-eight hours after such arrest or detention.
Provided that no person shall be liable for any act done in the performance of a judicial function for which he would not be liable apart from this subsection.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence:
Provided that the trial may take place in his absence in any case in which it is so provided by a law under which he is entitled to adequate notice of the charge and the date, time and place of the trial and to a reasonable opportunity of appearing before the court.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other treatment.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall affect the right of the owner of any private land beneath which any petroleum deposits are located to receive royalty from the Government, as provided in the Petroleum Act and the regulations made thereunder, existing at the commencement of the Belize Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not exceeding two months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a further resolution.
and may make such declarations and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 3 to 19 inclusive of this Constitution.
Nothing contained in any law in force immediately before Independence Day nor anything done under the authority of any such law shall, for a period of five years after Independence Day, be held to be inconsistent with or done in contravention of any of the provisions of this Part.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Belize other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and in sections 4 and 8 of this Constitution a court established by a disciplinary law;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means-
"legal practitioner" means a person admitted and enrolled as an attorney-at-law under the laws of Belize;
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
shall become a citizen of Belize on Independence Day.
Every person born in Belize on or after Independence Day shall become a citizen of Belize at the date of his birth:
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Belize by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth-
A person born outside Belize on or after Independence Day shall become a citizen of Belize at the date of his birth if, at that date, his father or mother is a citizen of Belize.
A citizen of Belize by birth or descent who acquires the citizenship of any other country may, if the laws of the other country so permit and at his option, retain his citizenship of Belize.
Provided that the Minister may in his discretion grant Belizean citizenship to persons falling under this subsection who would otherwise be entitled to such citizenship under the provisions of sections 23 and 25 of this Constitution.
There shall be a Governor-General of Belize who shall be a citizen of Belize appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's representative in Belize.
A person appointed to hold the office of Governor-General shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and office.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Belize to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into by any court of law.
The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the government of Belize and shall furnish the Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter relating to the government of Belize.
Provided that no person shall be appointed as a Prime Minister who has previously held the office of the Prime Minister for three parliamentary terms, either consecutively or in the aggregate; and for this purpose, the expression “parliamentary term” shall mean the period commencing on the date of the first sitting of the National Assembly after a general election and expiring at the date of the next ensuing dissolution of the National Assembly.
The Governor-General shall, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, designate a Minister as Deputy Prime Minister to whom the Prime Minister may from time to time depute such of his functions as he may specify.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to the absence or illness of the Prime Minister he may exercise those powers-
Provided that persons holding the office of Speaker of the House of Representatives or President of the Senate may not be appointed to the office of Minister:
Provided further that the Cabinet shall be comprised of-
Provided further that, subject to section 42(3) of this Constitution, a national of Belize may be appointed as Attorney General whether or not that person is a member of either House of the National Assembly.
Provided that responsibility for finance shall be assigned to a Minister who is a member of the House of Representatives.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers in accordance with the advice of the Deputy Prime Minister.
Provided that a Minister of State appointed under section 45 shall not be a member of Cabinet but may attend Cabinet meetings upon the invitation of the Prime Minister.
A Minister or a Minister of State shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and office.
Subject to the direction and control of the Minister pursuant to section 41(2) of this Constitution, every department of government shall be under the supervision of a public officer whose office is referred to in this Constitution as the office of a Chief Executive Officer:
Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Chief Executive Officer.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2)(c) of this section shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any other law, the Governor-General may constitute offices for Belize, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.
Where any person has been sentenced to death (otherwise than by a court-martial) for an offence, the Attorney-General shall cause a written report of the case from the trial judge (or the Chief Justice, if a report from the trial judge cannot be obtained), together with such other information derived from the record of the case or elsewhere as he may require, to be taken into consideration at a meeting of the Belize Advisory Council, so that the Council may advise the Governor-General whether to exercise any of his powers under section 52(1) of this Constitution.
Provided that:-
There shall be in and for Belize a Legislature which shall consist of a National Assembly comprising two Houses, that is to say, a House of Representatives and a Senate.
Subject to the provisions of section 58 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House of Representatives if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected unless, he-
Provided that if it appears to the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, that it is proper so to do, he may by order direct that any such disqualification shall be disregarded for the purposes of this section, but no such order shall be made if proceedings have been commenced calling in question the right of that member to be a member of the House of Representatives on the ground that he is disqualified under this paragraph.
Provided that if in the circumstances it shall appear to them just so to do, the House of Representatives by resolution may exempt any member thereof from vacating his seat under the provisions of this paragraph if such member shall, before becoming a party to such contract as aforesaid or before or as soon as practicable after becoming otherwise interested in such contract (whether as partner in a firm or director or manager of a company), disclose to the House the nature of such contract and his interest or the interest of any such firm or company therein;
Provided that the Speaker may from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
Provided that a person who is not a member of either House shall not be elected as Speaker if-
Provided that if the President of the Senate-
when the Senate is deciding on any matter referred to in section 61A (2)(d) of this Constitution.
Subject to the provisions of section 63 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator if, and shall not be qualified to be so appointed unless, he-
Provided that if it appears to the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, that it is proper so to do, he may by order direct that any such disqualification shall be disregarded for the purposes of this section.
Provided that if in the circumstances it shall appear to him to be just so to do, the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, may exempt any Senator from vacating his seat under the provisions of this paragraph if such Senator shall, before becoming a party to such contract as aforesaid or before or as soon as practicable after becoming otherwise interested in such contract (whether as partner in a firm or director or manager of a company), disclose to the Governor-General the nature of such contract and his interest or the interest of any such firm or company therein.
Provided that the President of the Senate may from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate.
Provided that a person shall not be elected as President if-
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the National Assembly may make laws for the peace, order and good government of Belize.
Provided that the election of a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives and the election of a President and Vice-President of the Senate may take place before the members of the House of Representatives or of the Senate, as the case may be, have made and subscribed such oath.
Without prejudice to any provision made by the National Assembly relating to the powers, privileges and immunities of the Senate or the House of Representatives and the committees thereof, or the privileges and immunities of the members and officers of either House and of other persons concerned in the business of either House or the committees thereof, no civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against any member of either House for words spoken before, or written in a report to, either House or a committee thereof or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him therein by petition, Bill, resolution, motion or otherwise.
A House shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy in the membership thereof (including any vacancy not filled when the House is first constituted or is reconstituted at any time) and any proceedings therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled so to do sat and voted in the House or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
Provided that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not have effect unless at least six months have elapsed between the date on which the Bill is passed by the House of Representatives in the first session and the date on which it is passed by the House in the second session.
"Be it enacted, by and with the advice and consent of the House of Representatives and the Senate of Belize and by the authority of the same, as follows:-"
"Be it enacted, by and with the advice and consent of the House of Representatives of Belize in accordance with the provisions of section 78 (or section 79, as the case may be) of the Constitution and by the authority of the same, as follows:-".
Provided that the first sitting of each House after the National Assembly has at any time been prorogued or dissolved shall begin at the same time.
Provided that the life of the National Assembly shall not be extended under this subsection for more than two years.
Provided that-
to fill the vacancy within three months of the occurrence of the vacancy unless the National Assembly is sooner dissolved.
shall be determined by the Supreme Court in accordance with the provisions of any law.
Provided that in the process of consultation with the Leader of the Opposition for the appointment of the Chairman, the Prime Minister shall use his best endeavours to secure the agreement of the Leader of the Opposition.
Any redivision of electoral divisions effected in accordance with section 90 of this Constitution shall, in respect of the election of members of the House of Representatives, come into operation at the next general election held after such redivision and not earlier.
At any general election-
Subject to the provisions of sections 88 to 92 inclusive of this Constitution, the provisions of the Representation of the People Act shall apply to the franchise, registration of voters, the administration of the electoral system, offences relating to the electoral system, the conduct of elections, and all matters connected therewith.
There shall be for Belize a Supreme Court of Judicature and Court of Appeal.
Provided that the Supreme Court shall not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any application made by a person sentenced to death under any law after the expiration of one year from the passing of the sentence.
Provided that the office of a justice shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof.
Provided that a person may act as a justice notwithstanding that he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiration of the period of his appointment or the revocation of his appointment, he may thereafter continue to act as a justice for so long as may be necessary to enable him to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him previously thereto.
Provided that-
may appoint a person over the age of sixty-five years as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, or may permit a Justice who attains the age of sixty-five years to continue in office, until, in either case, such person has attained any later age not exceeding seventy-five years.
A justice of the Supreme Court shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and office.
Provided that the office of Justice of Appeal shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder of that office.
Provided that where no period is specified in an instrument of appointment, such appointment shall be deemed to subsist until-
Provided that where no period is specified in an instrument of appointment, the office of a Justice of Appeal shall become vacant upon the expiry of the period specified in the Proviso to subsection (1) of section 101.
A Justice of Appeal shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and office.
Provided that in any matter before the Commission, where the votes are equally divided, the Chairman shall have a casting vote in addition to his original vote.
Provided that any law enacted by the National Assembly, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any law enacted by the National Assembly, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Auditor-General, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to the Commissioner of Police, the Commander, Belize Defence Force or the Commandant, Belize National Coast Guard Service.
Provided that in any matter before the Judicial and Legal Services Commission, where the votes are equally divided, the Chairman shall have a casting vote in addition to his original vote.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House of Representatives and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
Any law enacted by the National Assembly may make provision under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the appropriation law, whichever is the earlier.
The national symbols of Belize shall be those prescribed by the National Assembly.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as conferring on any person or authority power to require any Justice of the Supreme Court or Justice of Appeal, the Director of Public Prosecutions, or the Auditor-General to retire from the public service.
Provided that the resignation may be withdrawn before it takes effect if the person or authority to whom the resignation is addressed consents to its withdrawal.
No provision of this Constitution that any person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in the exercise of any functions under this Constitution shall be construed as precluding a court of law from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law or should not perform those functions.
Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any proclamation, regulation, order or rule, or to give any direction or instructions, the power shall be construed as including the power, exercisable in like manner, to amend or revoke any such proclamation, regulation, order, rule, direction or instructions.
There shall be a national seal bearing on it such device as the National Assembly shall approve by resolution.
"Belize" means the land and sea areas defined in Schedule 1 to this Constitution;
"Caribbean Court of Justice" means the Court established by the Agreement;
"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as the National Assembly may prescribe;
"Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal established by this Constitution;
"Crown" means the Crown in right of Belize;
"financial year" means the twelve months ending on 31st March in any year or on such other date as may from time to time be prescribed by any law enacted by the National Assembly;
"the Gazette" means the Belize Government Gazette and includes any supplement thereto;
"the Government" means the Government of Belize;
"the House" means the House of Representatives or the Senate as the context may require;
"the House of Representatives" means the House of Representatives established by this Constitution;
"Independence Day" means 21st September, 1981;
"law" means any law in force in Belize or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law, and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Minister" means a Minister of Government;
"the National Assembly" means the National Assembly established by this Constitution;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"oath of allegiance and office" means the oath prescribed in Schedule 3 to this Constitution;
"Police Department" means the Belize Police Department;
"President" and "Vice-President" mean the respective persons holding office as President and Vice-President of the Senate;
"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the Government;
"Senate" means the Senate established by this Constitution;
"session" means, in relation to a House of the National Assembly, the sittings of that House commencing when it first meets after the prorogation or dissolution of the National Assembly at any time and terminating when the National Assembly is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means, in relation to a House of the National Assembly, a period during which that House is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which the House is in committee;
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives;
"Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of Judicature established by this Constitution.
“Treaty” means the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas establishing the Caribbean Community including the Caricom Single Market and Economy that was signed in The Bahamas on the 5th day of July, 2001.
In this Part-
"the Letters Patent" means the Belize Letters Patent 1964 to 1979.
The Governor (as defined for the purposes of the Letters Patent) acting after consultation with the Premier (as so defined) may at any time after this section comes into operation exercise any of the powers conferred on the Governor-General by section 134 of this Constitution to such extent as may be necessary or expedient to enable the Constitution to function as from Independence Day.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution every person who immediately before Independence Day holds or is acting in a public office under the Letters Patent or the Constitution Ordinance shall, as from that day, continue to hold or act in that office or the corresponding office established by this Constitution as if he had been appointed thereto in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and as if he had taken any oath required by this Constitution or any other law:
Provided that any person who under the Letters Patent, the Constitution Ordinance or any other law in force immediately before Independence Day would have been required to vacate his office at the expiration of any period shall, unless earlier removed in accordance with this Constitution, vacate his office at the expiration of that period.
"the former Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal established by the Court of Appeal Ordinance 1967.
This Constitution shall come into operation on Independence Day:
Provided that sections 133 and 135 of this Constitution shall come into operation forthwith.
The Ordinances set out in Schedule 4 are revoked with effect from Independence Day.
For the purposes of this Part:-
“public utility provider” means–
“Government” means the Government of Belize;
“Government shareholding” shall be deemed to include any shares held by the Social Security Board;
“majority ownership and control” means the holding of not less than fifty one per centum (51%) of the issued share capital of a public utility provider together with a majority in the Board of Directors, and the absence of any veto power or other special rights given to a minority shareholder which would inhibit the Government from administering the affairs of the public utility provider freely and without restriction.
Provided that in the event the Social Security Board (“the Board”) intends to sell the whole or part of its shareholding which would result in the Government shareholding (as defined in section 143) falling below 51% of the issued stock capital of a public utility provider, the Board shall first offer for sale to the Government, and the Government shall purchase from the Board, so much of the shareholding as would be necessary to maintain the Government’s majority ownership and control of a public utility provider; and every such sale to the Government shall be valid and effectual for all purposes.
was duly carried out for a public purpose in accordance with the laws authorizing the acquisition of such property.
and also includes the Turneffe Islands, the Cayes of Lighthouse Reef and Glover Reef, together with all associated islets and reefs, and their adjacent waters as far as the outer limit of the territorial sea appertaining to them.
Provisions of Constitution referred to in section 69(3)-
Form of Oath
Oath of Allegiance and Office
I, ____________________________, do swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Belize, and will uphold the Constitution and the law, and that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as [ ] and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. [So help me, God.]
Form of Affirmation
Affirmation of Allegiance and Office
I, ____________________________, do solemnly and sincerely affirm and declare that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Belize, and will uphold the Constitution and the law, and that I will conscientiously, impartially and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as [ ] and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
Ordinance Revoked / References
British Honduras Constitution Ordinance, 1963. / No. 33/1963
British Honduras Constitution (Amendment) Ordinance, 1966 / No. 23/1966
British Honduras Constitution (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970 / No. 9/1970
