WE, the people of Bhutan:
BLESSED by the Triple Gem, the protection of our guardian deities, the wisdom of our leaders, the everlasting fortunes of the Pelden Drukpa and the guidance of His Majesty the Druk Gyalpo Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck;
SOLEMNLY pledging ourselves to strengthen the sovereignty of Bhutan, to secure the blessings of liberty, to ensure justice and tranquility and to enhance the unity, happiness and well-being of the people for all time;
DO HEREBY ordain and adopt this Constitution for the Kingdom of Bhutan on the Fifteenth Day of the Fifth Month of the Male Earth Rat Year corresponding to the Eighteenth Day of July, Two Thousand and Eight.
The National Flag
The upper yellow half that touches the base symbolizes the secular tradition. It personifies His Majesty the King, whose noble actions enhance the Kingdom. Hence, it symbolizes that His Majesty is the upholder of the spiritual and secular foundations of the Kingdom.
The lower orange half that extends to the top symbolizes the spiritual tradition. It also symbolizes the flourishing of the Buddhist teachings in general and that of the Kagyu and Nyingma traditions in particular.
The dragon that fully presses down the fimbriation symbolizes the name of the Kingdom, which is endowed with the spiritual and secular traditions.
The white dragon symbolizes the undefiled thoughts of the people that express their loyalty, patriotism and great sense of belonging to the Kingdom although they have different ethnic and linguistic origins.
The National Emblem
Within the circle of the national emblem, two crossed-vajras are placed over a lotus. They are flanked on either side by a male and female white dragon. A wish-fulfilling jewel is located above them. There are four other jewels inside the circle where the two vajras intersect. They symbolize the spiritual and secular traditions of the Kingdom based on the four spiritual undertakings of Vajrayana Buddhism. The lotus symbolizes absence of defilements, the wish fulfilling jewel, the sovereign power of the people, and the two dragons, the name of the Kingdom.
In the Kingdom of Bhutan adorned with cypress trees,
The Protector who reigns over the realm of spiritual and secular traditions,
He is the King of Bhutan, the precious sovereign.
May His being remain unchanging, and the Kingdom prosper,
May the teachings of the Enlightened One flourish,
May the sun of peace and happiness shine over all people.
"I,. . . . ., do solemnly swear/affirm that I shall uphold the sovereignty and integrity of Bhutan faithfully, conscientiously discharge my duties in the service of the Tsawa-sum and perform the duties of my office without fear or favour to the best of my ability, and that I shall bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of Bhutan."
"I,. . . . , do solemnly swear/affirm that I shall not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as a. . . . for the Royal Government of Bhutan except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as . . ."
Chhoe-sid: Religion and politics (temporal and secular).
Chhoe-sid-nyi: Dual system of religion and politics (temporal and secular).
Chibdrel: A ceremonial procession to receive and honour distinguished personages and personalities.
Chiwog: A unit under a Gewog.
Dakyen: Award of rank and responsibility.
Dar: Scarf that symbolizes the conferring of rank.
Drangpon: Judge or Justice of a Royal Court of Justice.
Dratshang: Monastic Body.
Dratshang Lhentshog: The Commission for the Monastic Affairs.
Druk: Bhutan.
Druk Gyalpo: The King of Bhutan.
Druk-lu: The tradition of the Drukpa Kargyu, established by Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal.
Dungkhag Court: Sub-district Court.
Dzong: Fortress, which is commonly used as an administrative center and traditionally is the abode of monks.
Dzongdag: District Administrator.
Dzongkha: The National Language of Bhutan.
Dzongkhag: District.
Dzongkhag Tshogdu: District Council.
Gewog: County.
Gewog Tshogde: County Committee.
Goendey: A monastic community.
Gup: Head of a Gewog.
Gyenja: Agreement.
Jabmi: Legal Counsel.
Je Khenpo: The Chief Abbot of the Central Monastic Body of Bhutan.
Kargyu: One of the four orders of Mahayana Buddhism.
Kasho: A written order.
Ked-dzog: Stages of development and completion in Vajrayana practice.
Kidu: Benefits granted by the King or the Government of Bhutan.
Lhakhang: Temple.
Lhengye: Ministerial position.
Lhengye Zhungtshog: Council of Ministers or Cabinet.
Lhentshog: Commission.
Lopon: Teacher.
Machhen: The holy relic of Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal, who unified Bhutan in the 17th century.
Mangmi: An elected representative of the Gewog, who is also a deputy Gup.
Nye: Sacred pilgrimage site.
Nyi-Kyelma: Conferring a red scarf (rank and honour with the title of Dasho).
Nyingma: One of the four orders of Mahayana Buddhism.
Pelden Drukpa: Glorious Bhutan or an illustrious Bhutanese person.
Rabdeys: Monastic bodies in dzongs other than Punakha and Thimphu.
Tashi-mon-lam: Prayers for fulfillment of good wishes and aspirations.
Ten-sum: Three types of sacred treasures comprising of images, scriptures and stupas.
Thromde: Municipality.
Thromde Tshogde: Municipal Committee.
Thrompon: Municipal Administrator or Mayor.
Triple Gem: Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
Tsa Thrim Chhenmo: The Supreme Constitution.
Tsawa-Sum: The King, Country and People.
Tshogpa: An association or committee.
Yenlag Thromde: Satellite town.
Zhug-drel-phunsum tshog-pai ten-drel: Traditional ceremony for the acquisition of the triple attributes of grace, glory and wealth during a formal and auspicious occasion.
Zhung Dratshang: Central Monastic Body.
