In ancient times mountains arose, rivers moved, and lakes were formed. Our Amazonia, our swamps, our highlands, and our plains and valleys were covered with greenery and flowers. We populated this sacred Mother Earth with different faces, and since that time we have understood the plurality that exists in all things and in our diversity as human beings and cultures. Thus, our peoples were formed, and we never knew racism until we were subjected to it during the terrible times of colonialism.
We, the Bolivian people, of plural composition, from the depths of history, inspired by the struggles of the past, by the anti-colonial indigenous uprising, and in independence, by the popular struggles of liberation, by the indigenous, social and labor marches, by the water and October wars, by the struggles for land and territory, construct a new State in memory of our martyrs.
A State based on respect and equality for all, on principles of sovereignty, dignity, interdependence, solidarity, harmony, and equity in the distribution and redistribution of the social wealth, where the search for a good life predominates; based on respect for the economic, social, juridical, political and cultural pluralism of the inhabitants of this land; and on collective coexistence with access to water, work, education, health and housing for all.
We have left the colonial, republican and neo-liberal State in the past. We take on the historic challenge of collectively constructing a Unified Social State of Pluri-National Communitarian law, which includes and articulates the goal of advancing toward a democratic, productive, peace-loving and peaceful Bolivia, committed to the full development and free determination of the peoples.
We women and men, through the Constituent Assembly (Asamblea Constituyente) and with power originating from the people, demonstrate our commitment to the unity and integrity of the country.
We found Bolivia anew, fulfilling the mandate of our people, with the strength of our Pachamama and with gratefulness to God.
Honor and glory to the martyrs of the heroic constituent and liberating effort, who have made this new history possible.
Bolivia is constituted as a Unitary Social State of Pluri-National Communitarian Law (Estado Unitario Social de Derecho Plurinacional Comunitario) that is free, independent, sovereign, democratic, inter-cultural, decentralized and with autonomies. Bolivia is founded on plurality and on political, economic, juridical, cultural and linguistic pluralism in the integration process of the country.
Given the pre-colonial existence of nations and rural native indigenous peoples and their ancestral control of their territories, their free determination, consisting of the right to autonomy, self-government, their culture, recognition of their institutions, and the consolidation of their territorial entities, is guaranteed within the framework of the unity of the State, in accordance with this Constitution and the law.
The Bolivian nation is formed by all Bolivians, the native indigenous nations and peoples, and the inter-cultural and Afro-Bolivian communities that, together, constitute the Bolivian people.
The State respects and guarantees freedom of religion and spiritual beliefs, according to their view of the world. The State is independent of religion.
Sovereignty resides in the Bolivian people and is exercised directly and by delegation. The functions and attributes of the organs of public power emanate, by delegation, from sovereignty; it is inalienable and unlimited.
The following are essential purposes and functions of the State, in addition to those established in the Constitution and the law:
Every person has the right to receive an education at all levels, which is universal, productive, free, comprehensive and inter-cultural, and without discrimination.
Bolivians have the following rights:
The dignity and freedom of persons is inviolable. It is the primary responsibility of the State to respect and protect them.
Every person has the right to petition, individually and collectively, whether orally or in writing, and to receive a formal and prompt response. To exercise this right, the only requirement is to identify the petitioner.
The exercise of political rights is suspended in the following instances after a sentence has been executed and while the sentence has not been completed:
The Afro-Bolivian people enjoy, in everything corresponding, the economic, social, political and cultural rights that are recognized in the Constitution for the nations and the rural native indigenous peoples.
Everyone has the right to a healthy, protected, and balanced environment. The exercise of this right must be granted to individuals and collectives of present and future generations, as well as to other living things, so they may develop in a normal and permanent way.
Any person, in his own right or on behalf of a collective, is authorized to take legal action in defense of environmental rights, without prejudice to the obligation of public institutions to act on their own in the face of attacks on the environment.
The State has the irrevocable obligation to guarantee and sustain the right to health care, which is a supreme function and primary financial responsibility. The promotion of health and the prevention of diseases shall be prioritized.
The State shall guarantee the organized participation of the population in decision-making and in the management of the entire public health system.
The law shall regulate the donations and transplants of cells, tissue or organs, based on principles of humanity, solidarity, opportunity, providing them free of charge, and efficiency.
The State, through the courts and specialized administrative bodies, shall resolve all conflicts arising from labor relations between employer and employee, including those of industrial safety and social security.
The right to strike is guaranteed as the exercise of the legal power of workers to suspend work to defend their rights, in accordance with the law.
The cooperative system is based on principles of solidarity, equality, reciprocity, equity of distribution, social purpose, and the non profit motive of its members. The State shall promote and regulate the organization of cooperatives by means of the law.
Expropriation shall be imposed for reasons of necessity or public utility, defined in accordance with the law and upon prior fair indemnification. Urban real estate is not subject to reversion.
Every person of minor age is considered a child or adolescent. Children and adolescents have rights recognized in the Constitution, with the limits established by it, and they have the specific rights inherent to their development; to their ethnic, socio-cultural, gender and generational identity; and to the satisfaction of their needs, interests and aspirations.
It is the duty of the State, society and the family to guarantee the priority of the best interests of the child or adolescent, which includes the preeminence of his or her rights, the priority of receiving protection and aid in any circumstance, priority in the attention of public and private services, and access to prompt and appropriate administration of justice, and the assistance of specialized personnel.
The State recognizes and protects the family as the fundamental nucleus of society, and guarantees the social and economic conditions necessary for its full development. Every member has equal rights, obligations and opportunities.
Because of the best interests of children and adolescents and their right to the identity, presumed parentage shall be validated by indication of the mother or father. This presumption shall be valid in the absence of proof of the contrary, with the burden of proof on the person who denies parentage. In case that the proof negates the presumption, the costs incurred shall correspond to the one who indicated parentage.
Women and men are guaranteed the exercise of sexual rights and their reproductive rights.
The war veterans deserve the gratitude and respect of the public and private institutions and of the population in general; they shall be considered heroes and defenders of Bolivia and shall receive a life pension from the State as established by the law.
Everyone who has a disability enjoys the following rights:
The State shall guarantee disabled persons comprehensive prevention and rehabilitation services, as well as other benefits that are established by law.
The users and consumers enjoy the following rights:
Education shall promote civic-mindedness, intercultural dialogue and ethical moral values. The values shall incorporate gender equality, non differentiation of roles, non-violence, and the full enforcement of human rights.
Social participation, community participation, and the participation of the parents in the educational system are recognized and guaranteed by means of representative organizations at all levels of the State and in the nations and the rural native indigenous peoples. Their composition and attributes shall be established by the law.
The State and society have the duty to eradicate illiteracy through programs compatible with the cultural and linguistic reality of the population.
The State shall promote and guarantee the continuing education of children and adolescents with disabilities, or of those with extraordinary talents in learning, under the same structure, principles and values of the educational system, and shall establish a special organization and development curriculum.
Freedom of thought, faith and religious education, as well as the spirituality of the nations and the rural native indigenous peoples, shall be recognized and guaranteed in the educational centers. Mutual respect and coexistence among persons of diverse religions shall be promoted, without dogmatic imposition. There shall be no discrimination on the basis of religious choice with respect to the acceptance and permanence of students in these centers.
The operation of contracted educational units for purposes of social service, which offer free access and are non-profit, shall be recognized and respected. They shall operate under the supervision of public authorities, respecting the right of the administration of religious entities over said educational units, without prejudice to that established in national dispositions, and they shall be governed by the same norms, policies, plans and programs of the educational system.
The follow up, measurement, evaluation and accreditation of the quality of education in the entire educational system, shall be entrusted to a technically specialized public institution, which is independent of the Ministry of the branch. Its composition and operation shall be determined by the law.
Post graduate training at all levels shall have as its fundamental mission the qualification of professionals in different areas, through processes of scientific research and the generation of knowledge linked to reality in order to contribute to the comprehensive development of society. Post-graduate training shall be coordinated by a body formed by the universities of the educational system, in accordance with the law.
The intangible aspects of the manifestations of art and popular industries shall enjoy the special protection of the State. Likewise, the tangible and intangible aspects of places and activities, which are declared cultural patrimony of humanity, shall be protected.
The State shall register and protect individual and collective intellectual property in the works and discoveries of authors, artists, composers, inventors and scientists, under the conditions determined by law.
Everyone has the right to sports, physical culture and recreation. The State guarantees access to sports without distinction as to gender, language, religion, political orientation, territorial location, social, cultural membership or any other characteristic.
The State shall promote, by educational, recreation and public health policies, the development of physical culture and the practice of sports in their preventive, recreational, training and competitive levels, with special attention given to persons with disabilities. The State shall guarantee the methods and necessary economic resources to make them effective.
The duties of Bolivians are:
The crimes of genocide, offenses against humanity, treason, and war crimes are not extinguishable.
The crimes committed by public servants that are perpetrated against the patrimony of the State and cause serious economic harm, are not extinguishable, and no immunities are to be applied.
The acts of persons who usurp functions, which are not their responsibility, as well as the acts of those who exercise jurisdiction or power that does not emanate from the law, are null and void.
The law stipulates only with respect to future acts and shall have no retroactive effect, except in the following cases: in labor matters when it expressly makes determinations in favor of workers; in criminal matters, when it benefits the accused; in corruption matters in order to investigate, process and sanction crimes committed by public servants against the interests of the State; and in the rest of the cases set forth by the Constitution.
Anyone who believes his or her life is in danger, that he or she is being illegally persecuted, unjustly tried or deprived of personal liberty, shall file a claim of Action for Liberty (Accion de Libertad) and present him or herself, either in writing or orally, on his or her own behalf or by anyone in his or her name, and without any formal procedure, before any judge or competent court in criminal matters, and shall request that his or her life be protected, that the unjustified persecution be halted, that the legal formalities be reestablished, or that his or her right to liberty be restored.
The Action for Constitutional Protection (Accion de Amparo Constitucional) shall take place against the illegal or unjustified acts or omissions of public servants or of individuals or collectives, who restrict, suppress or threaten to restrict or suppress rights recognized by the Constitution and the law.
Every person or collective affected by a juridical norm contrary to the Constitution shall have the right to present an Action for Unconstitutionality (Accion de Inconstitucionalidad), pursuant to the procedures established by law.
The decision that declares a law, decree, or any other kind of nonjudicial resolution unconstitutional makes the challenged norm inapplicable and has full effect with respect to everyone.
The Popular Action (la Accion Popular) shall proceed against any act or omission by the authorities or individuals or collectives that violates or threatens to violate rights and collective interests related to public patrimony, space, security and health, the environment and other rights of a similar nature that are recognized by this Constitution.
In the case of danger to the security of the State, external threat, internal disturbance or national disaster, the President of the State shall have the power to declare a state of emergency, wherever necessary in all or part of the territory. The declaration of the state of emergency shall not, in any case, suspend the guarantees of rights, nor the fundamental rights, the right of due process, the right to information and the rights of persons deprived of liberty.
Bolivian nationality is acquired by birth or by naturalization. Persons who are born in the territory of Bolivia are Bolivians by birth, with the exception of children of foreign personnel on diplomatic mission; persons born abroad of a Bolivian mother or father are Bolivians by birth.
The Pluri-National Legislative Assembly is composed of two chambers, the Chamber of Deputies (Camara de Diputados) and the Chamber of Senators (Camara de Senadores), and it is the only body with authority to approve and sanction laws that govern the entire Bolivian territory.
To be a candidate to the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly, one must satisfy the general requisites for public service, be 18 years of age at the time of election, and have resided permanently for at least two years immediately prior to the election in the corresponding district.
The members of the assembly do not enjoy immunity. Preventive detention shall not be applied to them in criminal processes during their mandate, except in cases of flagrant crimes.
During recesses, the Assembly Commission (Comision de Asamblea) shall function, in the form and with the attributes determined by the Rules of the Chamber of Deputies (Reglamento de la Camara de Diputados). In extraordinary cases, for matters of urgency, the Assembly can be convoked by its President or by the President of the State. It shall only take up the matters set forth in the convocation.
The Pluri-National Legislative Assembly shall inaugurate its sessions on the 6th of August in the Capital of Bolivia, unless expressly called by its President.
The term of the mandate of the members of the assembly is five years, and they may be reelected for a single additional continuous term.
The mandate of the member of the assembly ends in the following circumstances: the death or resignation of the member; the revocation of the member's mandate; the final condemnatory sentence of the member in a criminal case; or the unjustified abandonment of his or her functions for more than six continuous working days or eleven non continuous working days a year, as determined in accordance with the Rules.
The attributes of the Chamber of Deputies, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and the law, are:
The attributes of the Chamber of Senators, in addition to those determined by this Constitution and the law, are:
The Chambers shall meet in Pluri-National Legislative Assembly to exercise the following functions, as well as those set forth in the Constitution:
The legislative process shall develop in the following manner:
To be a candidate for President or Vice President of the State, one must satisfy the general conditions to be a public servant, be thirty years of age on the day of the election, and have resided permanently in the country for at least five years immediately prior to the election.
The period of the mandate of the President or Vice President is five years, and they may be reelected once for a continuous term.
The mandate of the President of the State shall end in the following circumstances: upon his or her death; by the presentation of his or her resignation to the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly; by definitive absence or impediment; by the imposition of a final condemnatory sentence in a criminal matter; or by the revocation of his or her mandate.
In the event the mandate is revoked, the President of State shall immediately cease in his or her functions; the Vice President must assume the Presidency and immediately call elections for the Presidency of the State to take place within a maximum period of ninety days.
The attributes of the President of the State, in addition to those established by this Constitution and the law, are the following:
The President of the State may absent him or herself from Bolivian territory for official missions for a maximum period of up to ten days without authorization of the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly.
The attributes of the Vice President of the State, in addition to those established in this Constitution and the laws, are as follows:
To be designated a Minister, a person must meet the following requisites: satisfy the general requirements for entering public service, be twenty five years of age on the day of his or her nomination, not be a member of the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly, nor a director, shareholder or owner of financial entities or enterprises that have a contractual relationship or conflicts of interest with the State; not be the spouse or natural parent or related in the second degree to the acting President or Vice President of the State.
Anyone who, whether directly or as the legal representative of a legal person, has a contract pending fulfillment or is indebted to the State may not be designated as a Minister.
The Supreme Court of Justice is the highest court of ordinary jurisdiction. It is made up of Magistrates. It is internally organized into specialized chambers. Their composition and organization shall be determined by law.
The following are the attributes of the Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to those provided by law:
The judicial functions of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be exercised in an exclusive manner.
The Agro-Environmental Court (Tribunal Agroambiental) is the highest court specialized in agro-environmental jurisdiction. It is governed specifically by the principles of social benefit, comprehensiveness, immediacy, sustainability and being inter-cultural.
To be elected Magistrate of the Agro-Environmental Court, one must meet the same requirements as those for members of the Supreme Court of Justice, in addition to the following: have expertise in these matters and have performed well, ethically and honestly as an agrarian judge; have practiced law or have been a university professor in the subject matter for a period of eight years. In the pre-selection of candidates, pluralistic composition shall be guaranteed by considering the criteria of pluri-nationality.
The following are the attributes of the Agro-Environmental Court, in addition to those set forth in the law:
The powers of the Council of Ministers of Justice, in addition to those established in the Constitution and the laws, are the following:
The Judges of the Pluri-National Constitutional Court shall be elected by universal suffrage, pursuant to the procedure, mechanism and formalities used for the election of the members of the Supreme Court of Judges.
The time of service, permanence and removal from office established for the Judges of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be applied to the members of the Pluri-National Constitutional Court.
The Judges of that Pluri-National Constitutional Court shall be governed by the same system of prohibitions and incompatibilities as applied to public servants.
In addition to those established by law, the powers of the Pluri-National Constitutional Court, are to hear and resolve the following:
The decisions and sentences of the Pluri-National Constitutional Court are binding and of obligatory compliance, and no subsequent ordinary appeal of them is allowed.
The law shall determine the procedures that govern the processes brought before the Pluri-National Constitutional Court.
To be designated a Voting member of the Supreme Electoral Court and the Departmental Electoral Court, once must satisfy the general requirements for being a public servant, to be thirty years of age at the time of his or her designation and to have academic education.
The candidates for public elected posts, with the exception of the elected positions of the Judicial Organ and the Pluri-National Constitutional Court (Tribunal Constitucional Plurinacional), shall be proposed by the organizations of the nations and rural native indigenous peoples, citizen associations and political parties, in equal conditions and pursuant to the law.
No candidate may be proposed for more than one elective post or for more than one electoral district at the same time.
The Comptroller or Comptroller General of the State shall be designated by two third votes of the members present of the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly. The election shall require prior public notice, and determination of the professional capacity and merits through a public process.
To be designated as Comptroller or Comptroller General of the State, one must fulfill the general requisites for public service; be at least thirty years old at the time of designation; have obtained a professional degree in an area related to the post and have practiced as a professional for a minimum of eight years; to have shown personal and ethical integrity, determined by public observation.
The Comptroller or Comptroller General of the State shall carry out his or her functions for a period of six years, without the possibility of being reappointed.
The Public Defender shall be designated by at least two-thirds of the members present of the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly. The designation shall require a prior public announcement and determination of professional capacity and merit through a public competition among persons recognized for their career in defense of human rights.
To be designated as Public Defender one must satisfy the general conditions to be a public servant, be thirty years old at the time of designation and have proven personal and ethical integrity determined by public observation.
The powers of the Office of the Public Defender, in addition to those established in the Constitution and the law, are the following:
Each year, the Public Defender shall report to the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly and to the Office of Social Control concerning the situation of human rights in the country and on the management of its administration. The Public Defender may be called on at any moment by the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly or the Social Control to provide a report with respect to the exercise of its authority.
Each year, the Ombudswoman or Ombudsman shall report to the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly and to the Institution of Social Control on the situation of human rights in the country and the management of its administration. The Ombudswoman or Ombudsman may be summoned at any moment by the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly or by the Institution of Social Control, in order to provide a report on the exercise of its functions.
The Prosecutor or the General Prosecutor of the State shall exercise his or her functions for six years, with no possibility of being designated again.
The Office of the Attorney General of the State is the institution of public juridical representation, which has the power to promote, defend and safeguard the interests of the State. Its organization and structure shall be determined by law.
The powers of the Office of the Attorney General of the State, in addition to those determined by the Constitution and the laws, are the following:
The Public Administration is governed by the principles of legitimacy, legality, publicity, social commitment and interest, ethics, transparency, equality, competence, efficiency, quality, friendliness, honesty, responsibility and results.
Public Servants are persons who perform public functions. Public servants form part of the administrative personnel, except for those who are in elected posts, those who are designated, and those who are appointed to perform duties.
To perform public functions, one must satisfy the following requisites:
The following are the obligations of public servants:
The prohibitions in carrying out the public function are as follows:
Persons who fall within the following grounds are ineligibility to hold elective public office:
The following are not compatible with the performance of public functions:
Participation and public monitoring implies the following activities, in addition to those established in the Constitution and the law:
The Armed Forces of the State are organically comprised of the Commander in Chief, the Army, the Air Force and the Navy of Bolivia, the forces of which shall be defined by the Pluri-National Legislative Assembly at the proposal of the Executive Organ.
The fundamental mission of the Armed Forces is the following: the defense and preservation of the independence, security and stability of the State, and the honor and sovereignty of the country; to assure the supremacy of the Constitution; to guarantee the stability of the legitimately constituted Government; and to participate in the development of the country.
The organization of the Armed Forces is based on its hierarchy and discipline. It is essentially subservient, is not a deliberative body, and is subject to the laws and military regulations. As an institutional organ, it does not carry out any political activity; individually, its members enjoy and exercise the rights of citizens under the conditions established by the law.
The Supreme Council of Defense of the Pluri-National State, the composition, organization and faculties of which are to be determined by law, shall be presided over by the Captain General of the Armed Forces.
Every Bolivian shall be obligated to render military service in accordance with the law.
The promotions in the Armed Forces shall be granted in accordance with the respective law.
The Bolivian Police Force is subordinate to the President of the State, through the intermediary of the Minister of Government.
To be designated Commander General of the Bolivian Police, it is necessary to be a Bolivian by birth, a General of the institution, and to meet the requisites set forth in the law.
In the event of international war, the forces of the Bolivian Police shall be subordinated to the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces for the time that the conflict lasts.
The procedures for approval of international treaties shall be regulated by the law.
The territorial integrity, preservation and the development of the border zones are a duty of the State.
The defense, security and control of border zone security are the fundamental duty of the Armed Forces. The Armed Forces shall participate in the policies of comprehensive and sustainable development of these zones, and shall guarantee their physical presence in them.
The representatives of Bolivia to the supra-state parliamentary bodies emerging from the integration processes shall be elected by universal vote.
The development of maritime interests, rivers and lakes, and shipping will be the priority of the State and its administration and protection shall be exercised by the Bolivian Navy, according to the law.
The principles that govern territorial organization and the decentralized and autonomous territorial entities are: unity, voluntariness, solidarity, equity, the common good, self government, equality, complementariness, reciprocity, gender equity, subsidiarity, gradualness, coordination and institutional faithfulness, transparency, public participation and control, provision of economic resources and the pre-existence of the nations and rural native indigenous peoples, under the terms established in this Constitution.
Autonomy implies the direct election of the authorities by the citizens, the administration of its economic resources, and the exercise of legislative, regulatory, fiscal and executive authority by the organs of the autonomous government in the area of its jurisdiction, competence and authority.
The law shall regulate the formation of the communities among municipalities, regions and rural native indigenous territories for the purpose of achieving their objectives.
In the decentralized departments, the election of the prefects and departmental councils shall be carried out by universal suffrage. These departments may become autonomous departments by referendum.
Each deliberative organ of the territorial entities shall draft, in a participatory manner, the proposed Statute or Organic Charter, which must be approved by two-thirds of the total of its members. Upon prior constitutional review, it shall enter into force as the basic institutional norm of the territorial entity by means of referendum to approve it in its jurisdiction.
The autonomous territorial entities shall not be subordinate to each other and shall have equal constitutional rank.
The autonomous departmental government is composed of a Departmental Assembly, which has deliberative, fiscal, and legislative departmental authority in the area of its competence, and of an executive organ.
The departmental executive organ is directed by the Governor as the highest executive authority.
The government of each autonomous region shall consist of a Regional Assembly with deliberative, normative-administrative and supervisory authority within the areas of its competence, and an executive organ.
The autonomous municipal government shall consist of a Municipal Council with deliberative, supervisory and legislative municipal authority within the area of its competence; and an executive organ presided over by the Mayor.
The period of the mandate of the members of the Councils and Assemblies of the autonomous governments shall be five years, and they may be reelected once for a continuous mandate.
Rural native indigenous autonomy consists in self-government as an exercise of free determination of the nations and rural native indigenous peoples, the population of which shares territory, culture, history, languages, and their own juridical, political, social and economic organization or institutions.
Each rural, native, or indigenous autonomy shall draft its Statute according to its own norms and procedures, in conformity with the Constitution and the law.
The government of the rural native indigenous autonomies is exercised through their own norms and forms of organization, with the name that corresponds to each town, nation or community, as established in their statutes and subject to the Constitution and the law.
The region, once constituted as a regional autonomy, shall receive the authority that may be transferred or delegated.
Every assignment or transfer of authority must be accompanied by the determination of the source of economic and financial resources necessary for its exercise.
The State shall recognize, respect, protect and promote community economic development. This form of community economic organization includes productive and reproductive systems of public life, founded on the principles and visions of the nations and rural native indigenous peoples.
The form of state economic organization includes the enterprises and other economic entities that are state property, which shall comply with the following objectives:
The State recognizes and protects the cooperatives as forms of solidarity and cooperation, which are not for profit. The organization of cooperatives shall be promoted primarily in production activities.
To eliminate poverty and social and economic exclusion, and in order to achieve well being in its multiple dimensions, the economic organization of Bolivia has the following goals:
Private monopolies and oligopolies are prohibited, as well as any other form of association or public or private legal agreement by Bolivian or foreign persons, who attempt to control and have exclusivity over production and commercialization of goods and services.
The function of the State in the economy consists of the following:
The State shall guarantee the creation, organization and performance of a participatory planning entity that includes representatives of the public institutions and organized civil society.
The debts for economic damages caused to the state never expire.
Illicit economic activity, speculation, hoarding, money changing, usury, contraband, tax evasion and other related economic crimes shall be punished by the law.
The Central Bank of Bolivia is an institution of public law, with its own legal personality and patrimony. Within the framework of the economic policy of the State, it is the function of the Central Bank of Bolivia to maintain stability of the internal purchasing power of the currency in order to contribute to the economic and social development.
The activities of financial intermediation, the provision of financial services and any other activities related to the management, use and investment of savings, are matters of public interest and may only be exercised with prior authorization of the State, in accordance with the law.
The financial operations carried out by natural or legal persons, whether by Bolivians or foreigners, shall enjoy the right of confidentiality, except in judicial procedures in cases of the alleged commission of financial crimes, those in which fortunes are being investigated and others defined by the law. The entities, which are designated by law to investigate such cases, shall have the authority to obtain information about said financial operations without the need for judicial authorization.
In the context of sectoral policies, the State shall protect and promote:
The public service cooperatives shall be non profit organizations of collective interest and submitted to governmental control, and they shall be administered democratically. The election of their administrative and supervisory authorities shall be carried out according to their own statutory norms and supervised by the Pluri-National Electoral Organ. Their organization and operation shall be regulated by law.
The State shall provide support to community economic organizations so that they may receive credits and financing.
The State recognizes the economic value of housework as a source of wealth, and it shall be quantified in public accounts.
The following are the resources of departments:
It is the duty of the State and the population to conserve, protect and use natural resources and the biodiversity in a sustainable manner, as well as to maintain the equilibrium of the environment.
The population has the right to participate in environmental management, and to be consulted and informed prior to decisions that could affect the quality of the environment.
The policies of environmental management are based on the following:
The natural assets are of public importance and of strategic character for the sustainable development of the country. Their conservation and use for the benefit of the population shall be the responsibility and exclusive authority of the State, and sovereignty over natural resources may not be compromised. The law shall establish the principles and disposition for its management.
Any title granted over fiscal reserves shall be null and void, except by express authorization for state necessity and public utility, in accordance with the law.
The exploitation of natural resources in a determined territory shall be subject to a process of consultation with the affected population, called by the State, which shall be free, prior in time and informed. Citizen participation is guaranteed in the process of the management of the environment, and the conservation of ecosystems shall be promoted, in accordance with the Constitution and the law. In the nations and rural native indigenous peoples, the consultation will be carried out with respect given to their own norms and procedures.
The Bolivian people shall have equitable access to the benefits which come from the use of all the natural resources. Priority participation shall be assigned to the territories where these resources are found, and to the nations and rural native indigenous peoples.
The State shall develop and promote research related to the management, conservation and use of natural resources and to biodiversity.
The activities of exploration, exploitation refining, industrialization, transport and sale of nonrenewable natural resources shall have the character of state necessity and public utility.
Since it is social property of the Bolivian people, no foreign person or enterprise, nor any private Bolivian person or enterprise, may register the property title to Bolivian natural resources in stock markets, nor can they use them as means for financial operations that grant title to or use them as security. The annotation and registry of reserves is the exclusive authority of the State.
The rights to the use and exploitation of natural resources shall be subject to the Constitution and the law. These rights shall be subject to periodic review for compliance with the technical, economic and environmental regulations. The violation of the law shall lead to the reversion or nullification of the rights of use and exploitation.
The state shall define the policy for hydrocarbons, shall promote their comprehensive, sustainable and equitable development, and shall guarantee energy sovereignty.
YPFB, on behalf and in representation of the Bolivian State, shall operate and exercise property rights in the territories of other states.
A self-sufficient institution of public law, with autonomy in its administrative, technical and economic management, under the legal protection of the Ministry of the branch, it shall be responsible for the regulations, control, supervision and fiscal control of the activities of the entire productive chain up to industrialization, within the framework of the state hydrocarbon policy, in accordance with the law.
Every foreign enterprise that carries out activities in the chain of production of hydrocarbons in name and representation of the State shall submit to the sovereignty of the State, and to the laws and authority of the State. No foreign court case or foreign jurisdiction shall be recognized, and they may not invoke any exceptional situation for international arbitration, nor appeal to diplomatic claims.
The exploitation, consumption and sale of hydrocarbons and its derivatives must be subjected to a policy of development that guarantees internal consumption. The exportation of the excess production shall incorporate the greatest quantity of value added possible.
The departments that are producers of hydrocarbons shall receive a royalty of eleven percent of their audited departmental production of hydrocarbons. Similarly, the non producer departments of hydrocarbons and the General Treasury of the State shall obtain a participation in the percentages, which shall be fixed by a special law.
Water resources of the rivers, lakes and lagoons that form the water basins are considered strategic resources for the development and sovereignty of Bolivia because of their potential, for the variety of natural resources that they contain, and because they are a fundamental part of the ecosystems. The State shall avoid actions in the sources and intermediary zones of rivers that may cause damages to the ecosystems or diminish the flow volume, shall preserve the natural state, and shall watch over the development and welfare of the population.
The State has the authority and duty to defend, recover, protect and repatriate biological material derived from natural resources, from ancestral knowledge and other sources that originate within the territory.
The State shall establish measures for the partial or total, temporary or permanent, restriction of the uses of extracts from the resources of biodiversity. The measures shall be directed toward the need to preserve, conserve, recover and restore the biodiversity at risk of extinction. Illegal possession, handling and trafficking of species of biodiversity shall be criminally punished.
The State protects the native and ancestral coca as cultural patrimony, as a renewable natural resource of the biodiversity of Bolivia, and as a factor of social unity. In its natural state coca is not a narcotic. The revaluation, production, sale and industrialization of coca shall be governed by law.
The natural forests and woodlands are strategic for the development of the Bolivian people. The State shall recognize the rights to exploit the forests for the benefit of communities and individual traders. In addition, it shall promote activities of conservation and sustainable exploitation, the generation of added value to its products, and the rehabilitation and reforestation of degraded areas.
The rural native indigenous communities located within forest areas shall have the exclusive right to their exploitation and their management, in accordance with the law.
The State recognizes, protects and guarantees individual and communitarian or collective property of land, as long as it fulfills a social purpose or social economic purposes, as the case may be.
Latifundio and double title are prohibited because they are contrary to the collective interest and development of the country. Latifundio is understood to mean the non-productive holding of land; the land that does not fulfill a social economic function; the exploitation of land that applies a system of servitude, quasi-slavery and slavery in labor relations; or the property that surpasses the maximum surface area established in the law. In no case may the maximum surface exceed five thousand hectares.
Because it affects sustainable exploitation and is contrary to the collective interest, the division of land into areas less than the maximum area of small property as recognized in the law is prohibited. The maximum area for small property established by law shall take into account the characteristics of the geographic zone.
The State has the obligation to:
The Bolivian Agrarian Reform Service (Servicio Boliviano de Reforma Agraria), the maximum authority of which is the President of the State, is the entity responsible for planning, executing and consolidating the agrarian reform process, and it has jurisdiction in the entire territory of the country.
Comprehensive, sustainable rural development is a fundamental part of the economic policies of the State, which shall prioritize its actions to encourage all communitarian economic undertakings and those of the group of rural actors, placing emphasis on food security and sovereignty, by means of the following:
The objectives of the policy of the State for comprehensive rural development, in coordination with the autonomous and decentralized territorial entities, are the following:
The State shall determine the incentives for the benefit of small and medium producers for the purpose of compensating for the disadvantages of unequal exchange between agricultural and livestock products and the rest of the economy.
The production, importation and commercialization of genetically altered products shall be regulated by law.
The Pluri-National Legislative Assembly shall approve, within the maximum term of one hundred and eighty days from the time of its installation, the law of the Pluri-National Electoral Organ, the law of the Judicial Organ, the law of the Pluri-National Constitutional Court, and the Law of the Framework of Autonomy and Decentralization.
The election of the authorities of the organs included in the second disposition shall be carried our pursuant to the electoral calendar established by the Pluri-National Electoral Organ.
The laws necessary for the development of the constitutional dispositions shall be approved during the first mandate of the Pluri-national Legislative Assembly.
In the maximum time of one year after the law of the Judicial Organ enters into force, and pursuant to it, the judicial posts shall be reviewed.
For purposes of application of paragraph I of article 293 of this Constitution, indigenous territory shall have as the basis of its demarcation the Communitarian Lands of Origin. Within the term of one year from the election of the Executive and Legislative Organ, the category of Communitarian Land of Origin shall be subject to administrative process to convert it to Rural Native Indigenous Territory, within the framework established in this Constitution.
The international treaties existing prior to the Constitution, which do not contradict it, shall be maintained in the internal legal order with the rank of law. Within the period of four years after the election of the new Executive Organ, the Executive shall renounce and, in that case, renegotiate the international treaties that may be contrary to the Constitution.
The requisite of speaking at least two of the official languages for the performance of public functions, as determined in Article 235.7, shall be applied progressively in accordance with the law.
Abrogating provision. The Constitution of the State of 1967 and its subsequent reforms are abrogated.
This Constitution, approved by referendum by the Bolivian people shall enter into force on the day of its publication in the Official Gazette.
