Botswana is a sovereign Republic.
The Public Seal of the Republic shall be such device as may be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
Whereas every person in Botswana is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever his or her race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest to each and all of the following, namely—
the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he or she dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought as soon as is reasonably practicable before a court; and if any person arrested or detained as mentioned in paragraph (b) of this subsection is not tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings that may be brought against him or her, he or she shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he or she appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to trial.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his or her own consent the trial shall not take place in his or her absence unless he or she so conducts himself or herself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his or her presence impracticable and the court has ordered him or her to be removed and the trial to proceed in his or her absence.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent a court of record from punishing any person for contempt of itself notwithstanding that the act or omission constituting the contempt is not defined in a written law and the penalty therefor is not so prescribed.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
unless before the expiration of that period, it is approved by a resolution passed by the National Assembly, supported by the votes of a majority of all the voting members of the Assembly.
Provided that the National Assembly may, by resolution, supported by the votes of a majority of all the voting members of the Assembly, extend its approval of the declaration for periods of not more than six months at a time.
and may make such orders, issue such writs and give such direction as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 3 to 16 (inclusive) of this Constitution.
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means—
"legal representative" means a person entitled to practise in Botswana as an advocate or attorney;
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
[Repealed.]
There shall be a President of the Republic of Botswana who shall be the Head of State.
the new National Assembly shall meet on such day (not being more than 14 days after the result of the election is ascertained or, as the case may be, the declaration that no candidate has been elected) as the Speaker shall appoint, and shall elect a person to the office of President in such manner as is prescribed by section 35(5) of this Constitution and subject thereto by or under an Act of Parliament. Such an election shall take place before the election of the Specially Elected Members of the National Assembly.
"the Parliamentary election" means the general election to elect those Members of the National Assembly who are referred to in section 58(2)(a) of this Constitution following any dissolution of Parliament;
"Presidential candidate" means a candidate for the office of President;
"the returning officer" means the returning officer specified in section 38 of this Constitution.
the functions of the office of President shall, until such time as a new President assumes office in accordance with this section or section 32 of this Constitution, be performed by such Minister as the Cabinet shall appoint. For the purposes of this subsection, a certificate of the Chief Justice that the Vice-President is by reason of physical or mental infirmity unable to discharge the functions of his or her office, shall, in respect of any period for which it is in force, be conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court.
to discharge such of the functions of the office of President as he or she may specify, and the Vice-President or other Minister may discharge those functions until his or her authority is revoked by the President.
shall perform the functions of the office of President.
shall, in respect of any period for which it is in force, be conclusive and shall not be questioned in any court:
Provided that any such certificate as is referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection shall cease to have effect if the President notifies any person under subsection (4) of this section that he or she is about to resume the functions of the office of President.
A person assuming the office of President shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe such oaths as may be prescribed by Parliament.
shall be referred to and determined by the returning officer whose decision shall not be questioned in any court.
Provided that the office of Vice-President shall become vacant—
Provided that a person appointed under this subsection shall cease to perform the functions of the office of Vice-President—
Provided that a person appointed under this subsection shall cease to perform the functions of the office of Vice-President—
Provided that—
The office of any Minister or Assistant Minister shall become vacant—
The Vice-President, a Minister or an Assistant Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his or her office unless he or she has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his or her office as may be prescribed by Parliament.
The Vice-President shall be the principal assistant of the President in the discharge of his or her executive functions and shall be responsible, under the directions of the President, for such business of the government of Botswana (including the administration of any department of Government) as the President may assign to him or her.
Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (3)(c) of this section shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such person.
Provided that-
Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of Government, he or she shall exercise general direction and control over that department and, subject to such direction and control, the department shall be under the supervision of a Permanent Secretary whose office shall be a public office.
The President may—
Provided that his or her seat shall become vacant—
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, the powers of constituting and abolishing offices for Botswana shall vest in the President.
There shall be a Parliament of Botswana which shall consist of the President and a National Assembly.
Subject to the provisions of section 62 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a Member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected unless—
Botswana shall be divided into as many constituencies as there are Elected Members of the National Assembly and each of those constituencies shall return one Member to the National Assembly.
the Judicial Service Commission shall, as soon as practicable thereafter, appoint a Delimitation Commission.
Provided that no person shall be disqualified from holding the office of Chairman or member of a Delimitation Commission by reason only of the fact that he has been the Speaker of the National Assembly if he or she was elected to that office from amongst persons who were not Members of the National Assembly.
Provided that a member appointed under this section because of the inability of some other member to discharge his or her functions shall cease to be a member of the Commission when, in the opinion of the Judicial Service Commission, that other member is able to resume his or her functions as a member of the Commission.
Provided that the number of inhabitants of a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of natural community of interest, means of communication, geographical features, density of population, and the boundaries of Tribal Territories and administrative districts.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
and over the conduct of such elections.
shall, unless he or she is disqualified for registration as a voter under any law, be entitled, upon his or her making application in that behalf at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by any law, to be registered as a voter for the purposes of elections of Elected Members of the National Assembly, and no other person may be so registered.
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the Member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of 30 days to enable the Member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate 150 days shall not be given without the approval of the Assembly signified by resolution.
The Speaker, before assuming the duties of his or her office, and every Member of the National Assembly before taking his or her seat therein, shall take and subscribe before the Assembly the oath of allegiance.
There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly—
If objection is taken by any Member of the National Assembly present that there are present in the Assembly (besides the person presiding) less than one third of the Members of the Assembly and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the rules of procedure of the Assembly, the person presiding ascertains that the number of Members present is less than one third, he shall thereupon adjourn the Assembly.
Any person who sits or votes in the National Assembly knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he or she is not entitled to do so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding P50 or such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament for each day on which he or she so sits or votes in the Assembly, which shall be recoverable by action in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General.
Every Member of the Ntlo ya Dikgosi shall, before taking his or her seat therein, take and subscribe before the Ntlo ya Dikgosi the oath of allegiance.
There shall be a Secretary to the Ntlo ya Dikgosi whose office shall be an office in the public service.
whichever occurs first.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Ntlo ya Dikgosi may, subject to the approval of the President, make rules regulating its own procedure and in particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, make rules for all or any of the following matter-
The Ntlo ya Dikgosi shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy among the Members thereof including any vacancy not filled when the Ntlo ya Dikgosi is first constituted or is reconstituted at any time; and any proceedings therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled to do so sat or voted in the Ntlo ya Dikgosi or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
Provided that he or she shall not be entitled to vote in the Ntlo ya Dikgosi.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws for the peace, order and good government of Botswana.
a Bill for an Act of Parliament under this section shall not be passed by the National Assembly unless—
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
If the National Assembly at any time passes a resolution supported by a majority of all the Members of the Assembly who are entitled to vote declaring that it has no confidence in the Government of Botswana, Parliament shall stand dissolved on the fourth day following the day on which such resolution was passed, unless the President earlier resigns his or her office or dissolves Parliament.
Any reference in this Constitution to the votes of two-thirds of the Members of the Assembly shall be construed as a reference to the votes of two-thirds of the Members of the Assembly excluding the person presiding.
Provided that the office of a judge of the High Court shall not be abolished while there is a substantive holder thereof.
Provided that—
Provided that a person may be so appointed notwithstanding that he or she has attained the age of 70 years or such other age as may be prescribed for the purposes of section 88 of this Constitution.
Provided that the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a person whose appointment to act as a judge of the High Court has expired or been revoked to continue to act as such a judge for such period as may be necessary to enable him or her to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him or her previously thereto.
Provided that the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a judge who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to enable him or her to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him or her before he or she attained that age.
A judge of the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of his or her office unless he or she has taken and subscribed such oath for the due execution of his or her office as may be prescribed by Parliament.
Provided that Parliament may make provision for the office of President of the Court of Appeal to be held by the Chief Justice ex-officio.
Provided that—
Provided that a person may be so appointed notwithstanding that he or she has attained the age of 70 years or such other age as may be prescribed for the purposes of section 101 of this Constitution.
Provided that the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a person whose appointment to act as a Justice of Appeal has expired or been revoked to continue to act as such a judge for such period as may be necessary to enable him or her to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him or her previously thereto.
Provided that—
A judge of the Court of Appeal shall not enter upon the duties of his or her office unless he or she has taken and subscribed such oath for the due execution of his or her office as may be prescribed by Parliament.
Provided that—
An appeal shall lie as of right to the Court of Appeal from any decision of the High Court which involves the interpretation of this Constitution, other than a decision of the High Court under section 69(1) of this Constitution:
Provided that no appeal shall lie from a determination of the High Court under this section dismissing an application on the ground that it is frivolous or vexatious.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, power to specify the qualifications and disqualifications for holding such public offices as he or she may constitute shall vest in the President.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the appropriate Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purposes of the Government of Botswana (not being revenues or other moneys that are payable by or under any law into some other fund established for a specific purpose or that may by or under any law be retained by the department of Government that received them for the purposes of defraying the expenses of that department) shall be paid into and form one Consolidated Fund.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly and the organisations of expenditure shall be included in a supplementary Appropriation Bill, or in a motion or motions approving such expenditure, which shall be introduced or moved in the Assembly.
Parliament may make provision under which, if the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier.
Provided that, if it is so provided by Parliament in the case of any body corporate directly established by law, the accounts of that body corporate shall be audited and reported on by such person as may be specified by or under that law.
Provided that in the case of a person who holds office as President his or her resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Chief Justice, in the case of a person who holds office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly his or her resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Assembly, in the case of an Elected or Specially Elected Member of the Assembly his or her resignation shall be addressed to the Speaker, and in the case of a Member of the Ntlo ya Dikgosi his or her resignation from that office shall be addressed to the Chairman of the Ntlo ya Dikgosi.
"Botswana" means the territory that, on 29th September, 1966, was comprised in the former Protectorate of Bechuanaland;
"Chief" and "Sub-Chief" have the meanings assigned to those expressions in the Chieftainship Act;
"financial year" means the period of 12 months ending on 31st March in any year or on such other day as Parliament may prescribe;
"the Gazette" means the Botswana Government Gazette;
"high judicial office" means the office of a judge of a court of unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in Botswana, a Commonwealth country or in any country outside the Commonwealth that may be prescribed by Parliament or the office of judge of a court having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court;
"Kgosana" (pl. Dikgosana) means Headman;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"the oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by law;
"public office" means, subject to the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section, an office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office;
"the public service" means the civil service of the Government;
"session" means the sittings of the National Assembly beginning when it first sits after the coming into operation of this Constitution or after Parliament is prorogued or dissolved at any time and ending when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means a period during which the National Assembly is sitting without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee;
"subordinate court" means any court established for Botswana other than—
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to references to the President or Vice-President in section 35, 36 or 39 of this Constitution.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as conferring on any person or authority power to require a judge of the Court of Appeal or the High Court, the Auditor-General or the Attorney-General to retire from the public service.
"general election" means an election to fill the vacancies among the Specially Elected Members occurring upon a dissolution of Parliament;
"the Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly; and
"prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under paragraph 2 of this Schedule.
on the list so constituted.
THE CENTRAL DISTRICT
THE GHANZI DISTRICT
THE KGALAGADI DISTRICT
THE KWENENG DISTRICT
THE NORTH WEST DISTRICT
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT
