We the representatives of the Brazilian People, convened the National Constituent Assembly, to institute a democratic state destined to ensure the exercise of social and individual rights, liberty, security, well-being, development, equality and justice as supreme values of a fraternal, pluralist and unprejudiced society, founded on social harmony and committed, in the domestic and international orders, to the peaceful solution of disputes, promulgate, under the protection of God, the following CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF BRAZIL.
The Federative Republic of Brazil, formed by the indissoluble union of States and Counties (municípios), as well as the Federal District, is a Democratic State of Law founded upon:
All power emanates from the people, who exercise it through elected representatives or directly, according to this Constitution.
The branches of the Union are the Legislative, the Executive and the Judiciary, which are independent and harmonious with each other.
The fundamental objectives of the Federative Republic of Brazil are:
The international relations of the Federative Republic of Brazil are governed by the following principles:
The Federative Republic of Brazil shall seek the economic, political, social and cultural integration of the people of Latin America, with a view toward forming a Latin-American community of nations.
Everyone is equal before the law, with no distinction whatsoever, guaranteeing to Brazilians and foreigners residing in the Country the inviolability of the rights to life, liberty, equality, security and property, on the following terms:
Education, health, nutrition, labor, housing, transport, leisure, security, social security, protection of motherhood and childhood and assistance to the destitute, are social rights, as set forth in this Constitution.
The following are rights of urban and rural workers, in addition to any others designed to improve their social condition:
The category of domestic workers is assured the rights set out in subparagraphs IV, VI, VII, VIII, X, XIII, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XXI, XXII, XXIV, XXVI, XXX, XXXI and XXXIII, and taking into consideration the conditions established in law and observing the simplification of the performance of the principal and accessory tax obligations, the provisions in the subparagraphs I, II, III, IX, XII, XXV and XXVIII, as well as integration into the social security system.
Persons are free to form professional or syndical associations, observing the following:
Provisions of this article apply to the organization of rural syndicates and fishing colonies, with due regard for conditions established by law.
The right to strike is guaranteed; it is up to the workers to decide when to exercise it and upon the interests to be defended thereby.
Participation of workers and employers is assured in the collegiate bodies of governmental agencies in which their professional or social security interests are subjects of discussion and deliberation.
In firms with more than two hundred employees, election of an employee representative is assured for the exclusive purpose of promoting direct negotiations with employers.
Brazilians are:
Portuguese is the official language of the Federative Republic of Brazil.
Popular sovereignty shall be exercised by universal suffrage, and by direct and secret vote, with equal value for all, and, as provided by law, by:
Deprivation of political rights is forbidden; loss or suspension of such rights may occur only in cases of:
A law altering the electoral process shall enter into force on its publication date and shall not apply to elections that occur within one year from the date it enters into force.
Creation, merger, incorporation, and dissolution of political parties is free, with due regard for national sovereignty, the democratic regime, multiplicity of political parties and fundamental human rights, observing the following precepts:
The political and administrative organization of the Federative Republic of Brazil includes the Union, States, Federal District, and Counties, all autonomous, as provided for in this Constitution.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties are forbidden to:
The following constitute property of the Union:
The Union shall have the power to:
The Union has exclusive power to legislate with respect to:
Complementary law may authorize the States to legislate on specific questions relating to matters covered in this article.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties, shall have joint powers to:
Complementary laws shall establish rules for cooperation among the Union, States, Federal District and Counties, aimed at balanced development and well-being on a nation-wide basis.
The Union, States and Federal District shall have concurrent power to legislate on:
The States are organized and governed by the Constitutions and laws that they may adopt, observing the principles of this Constitution.
The property of the States includes:
The number of Representatives in the State Legislative Assembly shall be three times the representation of the State in the Chamber of Deputies and, upon reaching thirty-six, the number shall be increased by as many Representatives as the number of Federal Deputies exceeding twelve.
The election of the State Governor and Lieutenant Governor, for a mandate of four years, shall be held on the first Sunday of October for the first round, and, if there should be a second round, on the last Sunday of October of the year before the end of their predecessors' mandate, and they shall take office on January first of the subsequent year, observing as well the provisions of Article 77.
Counties shall be governed by an organic law, voted in two rounds, with a minimum interval of ten days between each, and approved by two-thirds of the members of the county legislature, which shall promulgate it, observing the principles established in this Constitution, the respective State Constitution and the following precepts:
The total expenses of County Councils, including Aldermen's fixed compensation but excluding the expenses with the inactive, may not exceed the following percentages, with respect to the sum of tax receipts and transferences provided for in § 5° of art. 153 and arts. 158 and 159, effectively realized in the prior fiscal year:
The Counties have the power to:
Supervision of the County shall be performed by the County Legislature, through outside control and by the internal control systems of the County Executive, as provided by law.
The Federal District, which may not be divided into counties, shall be governed by an organic law, voted in two rounds with a minimum interval of ten days, and approved by two-thirds of the Legislative Chamber, which shall promulgate it, observing the principles established in this Constitution.
The law shall provide for the administrative and judicial organization of the Territories.
The Union shall not intervene in the States or in the Federal District, except to:
A State shall not intervene in its Counties, nor the Union in the Counties located in a Federal Territory, except when:
A decree of intervention shall depend:
The direct or indirect public administration of any of the Branches of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties, shall obey the principles of legality, impersonality, morality, publicity and efficiency, as well as the following:
The following provisions apply to civil servants of the direct administration, autarchies, or foundations, holding elective offices:
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall organize a policy council for administration and remuneration of personnel, composed of civil servants designated by the respective Branches.
Civil servants holding effective positions in the Union, the States, the Federal District and the Counties, including their autarchies and foundations, are assured a contributory and joint social security regime through contributions from the respective public entity, active or inactive public servants and pensioners, observing criteria that preserve financial and actuarial equilibrium and the provisions of this article.
Civil servants appointed to effective positions by virtue of public competitive examinations acquire tenure after three years of actual service.
Members of the Military Police and Fire Brigades, institutions organized on the basis of hierarchy and discipline, are military servicemen of the States, Federal District and Territories.
For administrative purposes, the Union may coordinate its actions in the same social and geo-economic complex, seeking its development and a reduction in regional inequalities.
The Legislative Branch is the National Congress, which is composed of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate.
Each legislative term shall last for four years.
The Chamber of Deputies is composed of representatives of the people, elected in each State, Territory and the Federal District by a proportional system.
The Federal Senate is composed of representatives of the States and the Federal District, elected by majority vote.
Except where there is a constitutional provision to the contrary, the decisions of each Chamber and its committees shall be taken by a majority vote whenever an absolute majority of its members is present.
The National Congress shall have the power, with the approval of the President of the Republic (not required for subjects specified in arts. 49, 51 and 52), to provide for all matters within the competence of the Union, particularly concerning:
The National Congress shall have exclusive powers:
The Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Senate, or any of their Committees, may summon a Minister of the Federal Government or any chief office holder in an agency directly subordinated to the Presidency of the Republic to testify in person on a pre-determined matter. Failure to appear without adequate justification shall constitute an impeachable offense (crime de responsabilidade).
The Chamber of Deputies has exclusive power:
The Federal Senate has exclusive power:
In cases provided for in subparagraphs I and II, the President of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, shall preside, and a conviction, which may only be rendered by two-thirds vote of the Federal Senate, shall be limited to the loss of office, with disqualification to hold any public office for a period of eight years, without prejudice to any other judicial sanctions that may be applicable.
The Deputies and Senators shall enjoy civil and criminal immunity for any of their opinions, words and votes.
Deputies and Senators may not:
Deputies or Senators shall lose their mandates if:
Deputies or Senators shall not lose their mandates when:
The National Congress shall meet annually in the Federal Capital, from February 2nd to July 17th and from August 1st to December 22nd.
The National Congress and both its Chambers shall have permanent and temporary committees, constituted in the form and with the powers provided for in the respective by-laws or in the act of their creation.
The legislative process includes preparation of:
Complementary law shall provide for preparation, reduction, alteration and consolidation of laws.
Constitutional amendments may be proposed by:
Any member or Committee of the Chamber of Deputies or Federal Senate or National Congress, the President of the Republic, the Supreme Federal Tribunal, the Superior Tribunals, the Procurator-General of the Republic and citizens, shall have the power to initiate complementary and ordinary laws, in the manner and cases provided for in this Constitution.
In relevant and urgent cases, the President of the Republic may adopt provisional measures with the force of law; such measures shall be submitted immediately to the National Congress.
An increase in proposed expenditures shall not be permitted:
Debates and votes on bills initiated by the President of the Republic, Supreme Federal Tribunal and Superior Tribunals shall start in the Chamber of Deputies.
A bill approved by one Chamber shall be reviewed by the other in a single round of discussion and voting; if the reviewing Chamber approves the bill, it shall be sent for enactment or promulgation, or if it is rejected, it shall be archived.
If a bill is amended, it shall return to the Chamber that initiated it.
The Chamber in which voting was concluded shall send the bill to the President of the Republic, who, if he consents, shall approve it.
The subject of a rejected bill of law may only constitute the subject of a new bill in the same legislative session if proposed by an absolute majority of the members of any of the Chambers of the National Congress.
Delegated laws shall be drafted by the President of the Republic, who shall request delegation from the National Congress.
Complementary laws shall be approved by an absolute majority.
Supervision of the accounting, finances, budgets, operations and patrimony of the Union and entities of direct and indirect administration with respect to legality, legitimacy, economy, application of subsidies and waiver of revenues shall be exercised by the National Congress, by means of external control and through the internal control system of each Branch.
Accounts shall be rendered by any individual or legal entity, public or private, that uses, collects, keeps, manages or administers public funds, property and securities or those for which the Union is responsible, or that assumes obligations of pecuniary nature in the name of the Union.
External control under the responsibility of the National Congress shall be exercised with the assistance of the Tribunal of Accounts of the Union, which shall have the power to:
If there are signs of unauthorized expenses, even in the form of non-programmed investments or non-approved subsidies, the permanent Joint Committee referred to in art. 166, § 1°, may request that the responsible government authority provide the necessary explanations within five days.
The Tribunal of Accounts of the Union, composed of nine Ministers, sits in the Federal District, with its own staff and with jurisdiction throughout the entire Brazilian territory, and where appropriate, shall exercise the powers provided in art. 96.
The Legislature, Executive and Judiciary shall maintain integrated systems of internal control in order to:
The rules established in this section shall apply, where appropriate, to the organization, composition and supervision of the Tribunals of Accounts of the States and the Federal District, as well as the Tribunals and Councils of Accounts of the Counties.
The State Constitutions shall provide for their respective Tribunal of Accounts, which shall be staffed by seven Councilors.
The powers of the Executive are exercised by the President of the Republic, assisted by the Ministers of the Federal Government.
The President and the Vice-President of the Republic shall be elected simultaneously on the first Sunday of October for the first round, and if there should be a second round, on the last Sunday of October of the year prior to the termination of the mandate of the current president.
The President and the Vice-President of the Republic shall take office at a session of the National Congress, taking an oath to maintain, defend and comply with the Constitution, observe the laws, promote the well-being of the Brazilian people, and sustain the union, integrity and independence of Brazil.
If within ten days from the date scheduled for assuming office, the President or Vice-President, except for force majeure, has not assumed the office, it shall be declared vacant.
The Vice-President shall replace the President in the event of impediment and shall succeed him in the event of vacancy.
The Vice-President of the Republic, in addition to other powers conferred on him by complementary laws, shall assist the President whenever called on by him for special missions.
In the event of impediment of the President and Vice-President, or a vacancy in the respective offices, the President of the Chamber of Deputies, President of the Federal Senate, and President of the Supreme Federal Tribunal shall be called successively to serve as President.
If a vacancy occurs in the offices of President and Vice-President of the Republic, an election shall be held ninety days after the last vacancy occurred.
The mandate of the President of the Republic is four years and shall begin on January 1st of the year following his election.
Under penalty of loss of office, the President and Vice-President of the Republic may not leave the country for a period of more than fifteen days without authorization from the National Congress.
The President of the Republic has the exclusive powers to:
The President of the Republic may delegate the powers mentioned in subparagraphs VI, XII and XXV, first part, to the Ministers of the Federal Government, the Procurator-General of the Republic or the Advocate-General of the Union, who shall observe the limitations set forth in the respective delegations.
Acts of the President of the Republic that are attempts against the Federal Constitution are impeachable offenses, especially those against the:
These offenses shall be defined in a special law, which shall establish rules of procedure and trial.
If two-thirds of the Chamber of Deputies accept an accusation against the President of the Republic, he shall be tried before the Supreme Federal Tribunal for common criminal offenses or before the Federal Senate for impeachable offenses.
Ministers of the Federal Government shall be chosen from among Brazilians older than twenty-one and in full possession of their political rights.
A Minister of the Federal Government, in addition to other powers set out in this Constitution and in law, shall have the power to:
The law shall provide for the creation and abolition of Ministries and agencies of public administration.
The Council of the Republic is the higher consultative body for the President of the Republic and in which the following participate:
The Council of the Republic has the authority to give its opinion on:
The National Defense Council is the consultative body of the President of the Republic on matters related to national sovereignty and defense of the democratic State, and in which the following participate as original members;
The Judiciary consists of:
Complementary law, proposed by the Supreme Federal Tribunal, shall set forth the Statute of the Judicature, observing the following principles:
One-fifth of the seats on the Federal Regional Tribunals and the Tribunals of the States, Federal District and Territories, shall be occupied by members of the Public Ministry with over ten years of service and by lawyers of notable legal knowledge and unblemished reputations, with over ten years of actual professional activity, nominated in a list of six names by the entities that represent the respective groups.
Upon receipt of the nominations, the Tribunal shall reduce the list to three names and send it to the Executive, who, within the next twenty days, shall select one of the listed names for appointment.
Judges enjoy the following guarantees:
Judges are forbidden to:
The following shall have exclusive powers:
Tribunals may declare public laws or normative acts unconstitutional only by vote of an absolute majority of their members or members of their respective special body.
The Union shall create in the Federal District and Territories and States shall create [within their borders]:
The Judiciary is assured administrative and financial autonomy.
Payments owed by the Federal, State, District and County Treasuries, by virtue of a court judgment, shall be made exclusively in the chronological order of submission of the precatórios and to the account of the respective credits. Designation of cases or persons in budget appropriations and the opening of additional credits for such purposes are prohibited.
The Supreme Federal Tribunal is composed of eleven Ministers, chosen from citizens between the ages of thirty-five and sixty-five, with notable legal knowledge and unblemished reputations.
Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, with approval of an absolute majority of the Federal Senate.
The Supreme Federal Tribunal has primary responsibility for safeguarding the Constitution, with the power:
A direct action of unconstitutionality and a declaratory action of constitutionality may be brought by:
By decision of two-thirds of its members, after reiterated decisions on constitutional matters, the Supreme Federal Tribunal may, ex officio or upon demand, approve a súmula which, upon publication in the official press, shall have binding effects on the other organs of the Judiciary and the federal, state and county public administration, both direct and indirect. The Supreme Federal Tribunal may also revise or cancel [its súmulas] in the manner established by law.
The National Council of Justice shall consist of fifteen members for a term of office of two years, with one renewal permitted, including:
The Superior Tribunal of Justice shall consist of at least thirty-three Ministers.
The Ministers of the Superior Tribunal of Justice shall be appointed by the President of the Republic, from Brazilians between the ages of thirty-five and sixty-five, with notable legal knowledge and unblemished reputations, upon approval by an absolute majority of the Federal Senate, with:
The Superior Tribunal of Justice has the power:
The following shall operate together with the Superior Tribunal of Justice:
The following are components of the Federal Courts:
Federal Regional Tribunals consist of at least seven judges, recruited, whenever possible, from their respective regions and appointed by the President of the Republic from Brazilians between the ages of thirty and sixty-five, with:
The Federal Regional Tribunals have power:
The federal judges have the power to hear and to decide:
Each State, as well as the Federal District, shall constitute a judicial section, which shall sit in the respective Capital, with courts of the first instance located as established by law.
In the Federal Territories, the jurisdiction and powers granted to the federal judges shall be attributed to the judges of the local courts, as provided by law.
The Labor Court System consists of:
The Superior Labor Tribunal shall be composed of twenty-seven Ministers, chosen among Brazilians between thirty-five and sixty-five years of age, with notable legal knowledge and unblemished reputations, nominated by the President of the Republic, after approval by an absolute majority of the Federal Senate, with:
The law shall create Labor Courts. In districts not included within their jurisdiction, the law may confer this jurisdiction on state court judges, with an appeal to the respective Regional Labor Tribunal.
The law shall provide for the constitution, investiture, jurisdiction, guarantees and conditions for performance for the agencies of the Labor Courts.
The Labor Court System has the power to hear and judge:
The Regional Labor Tribunals shall be composed of a minimum of seven judges recruited, when possible, from the respective region and appointed by the President of the Republic from Brazilians between the ages of thirty and sixty-five, with:
Jurisdiction in the Labor Courts shall be exercised by a single judge.
Revoked.
Revoked.
The Electoral Justice System consists of:
The Superior Electoral Tribunal shall be composed of at least seven members, chosen:
The Superior Electoral Tribunal shall elect its President and Vice-President from the Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, and an Electoral Inspector General from the Ministers of the Superior Tribunal of Justice.
There shall be a Regional Electoral Tribunal in the Capital of each State and Federal District.
The organization and jurisdiction of the electoral tribunals, state court judges and electoral boards shall be provided for by complementary law.
The Military Justice System consists of:
The Superior Military Tribunal shall be composed of fifteen Ministers with life tenure, appointed by the President of the Republic after approval of their nominations by the Federal Senate, with three from admirals of the Navy, four from generals of the Army, three from generals of the Air Force, all in active service and in the highest career rank, and with five from among civilians.
The civilian Ministers shall be chosen by the President of the Republic from Brazilians more than thirty-five years old, with:
The Military Justice System shall have jurisdiction to try and adjudicate the military crimes defined by law.
The law shall provide for the organization, operation and jurisdiction of the Military Justice System.
The States shall organize their Justice Systems, observing the principles established in this Constitution.
In order to decide rural land conflicts, the Tribunal of Justice shall propose creation of specialized courts, with exclusive jurisdiction over agrarian questions.
Whenever necessary to exercise jurisdiction efficiently, the judge shall go personally to the site of the legal controversy.
The Public Ministry is a permanent institution, essential to the jurisdictional function of the State, with responsibility for defending the legal order, the democratic regime and indispensable social and individual interests.
The Public Ministry includes:
The institutional functions of the Public Ministry are:
Provisions of this section relating to rights, prohibitions and form of investiture apply to members of the Public Ministry attached to Tribunals of Accounts.
The National Council of the Public Ministry shall consist of fourteen members appointed by the President of the Republic, after approval by an absolute majority of the Federal Senate, for a mandate of two years, permitting one additional term. It consists of:
The Advocacy-General of the Union is the institution that, either directly or through a subordinated agency, represents the Union, both judicially and extra-judicially. Under the terms of a complementary law providing for its organization and operations, it is responsible for the activities of legal consultation and counseling to the Executive.
The Procurators of the States and the Federal District, career positions into which admission depends upon public competitive examinations and professional credentials, with participation by the Brazilian Bar Association in all phases, shall provide judicial representation and legal counseling to their respective federative units.
Procurators referred to in this article are assured tenure after three years of actual service, via performance evaluation by their own agencies, after a corroborating report from the supervising judges.
Lawyers are indispensable to the administration of justice, and they are immune for their acts and manifestations in the practice of their profession, within the limits of the law.
The Public Defender’s Office is a permanent institution, essential to the State’s jurisdiction function, and it shall be fundamentally responsible, as an expression and instrument of the democratic regime, for legal orientation, the promotion of human rights, and the integral and gratuitous defense, at all levels, judicial and extrajudicial, of individual and collective rights of the needy, as set out in art. 5, LXXXIV.
The civil servants that form part of the careers regulated in Sections II and III of this Chapter shall be compensated in the form of art. 39, §4°.
After hearing from the Council of the Republic and the National Defense Council, the President of the Republic may decree a state of defense in specific restricted locations to preserve or promptly re-establish public order or social peace threatened by grave and imminent institutional instability or affected by large scale natural calamities.
After having heard from the Council of the Republic and the National Defense Council, the President of the Republic may request authorization from the National Congress to decree a state of siege in the event of:
Upon requesting authorization to decree a state of siege or to extend it, the President of the Republic shall submit the reasons for such request, and the National Congress shall decide on it by absolute majority.
The decree of a state of siege shall indicate the period of its duration, the rules required to implement it and the constitutional guarantees that are to be suspended. After publication, the President of the Republic shall designate the executor of the specific measures and the affected areas.
When a state of siege decreed under art. 137, I, is in effect, only the following measures may be taken against individuals:
Broadcasting pronouncements made by legislators in their Legislative Chambers, if authorized by the respective Executive Committee, is not included in the restrictions of subparagraph III.
After hearing from party leaders, the Executive Committee of the National Congress shall designate a Committee composed of five of its members to monitor and supervise implementation of measures concerning a state of defense and state of siege.
When the state of defense or state of siege ceases, its effects shall also cease, without prejudice to liability for unlawful acts committed by its executors or agents.
As soon as the state of defense or state of siege ceases, the measures applied during the period it was in force shall be reported by the President of the Republic in a message to the National Congress, specifying and justifying the actions taken, listing the names of those affected and indicating the restrictions applied.
The Armed Forces, made up of the Navy, Army and Air Force, are permanent and regular national institutions, organized on the basis of hierarchy and discipline, under the supreme authority of the President of the Republic, and intended to defend the Nation, guarantee the constitutional branches of government and, on the initiative of any of these branches, law and order.
Military service is compulsory as provided by law.
Public security, the duty of the State and the right and responsibility of all, is exercised for preservation of public order and security of persons and property, by means of the following agencies:
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties may levy the following tributes:
A complementary law shall:
The complementary law dealt with in subparagraph III, d, shall also institute a unified regime for collection of taxes and contributions of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties, observing that:
In order to prevent disequilibria from competition, a complementary law may establish special criteria for taxation, without prejudice to the jurisdiction of the Union to establish by law rules for the same purpose.
In federal territories, the Union has the power to levy state taxes and, if the territory is not divided into counties, county taxes as well. The Federal District has the power to impose county taxes.
The Union, through a complementary law, may impose compulsory loans:
Applications of the funds derived from a compulsory loan shall be tied to the expense that was the basis for its imposition.
The Union has the exclusive power to institute social contributions, contributions for the intervention in the economic domain, and contributions in the interest of professional or economic categories, as instruments of its activity in the respective areas, observing the provisions of arts. 146, III, and 150, I and III, and without prejudice to the provisions of art. 195, § 6°, with respect to the contributions mentioned in that provision.
The Counties and the Federal District may institute a contribution, as prescribed by their respective laws, for financing the service of public illumination, observing the provisions of art. 150, I and III.
The contribution referred to in the heading may be assessed on the bill for the consumption of electric energy.
Without prejudice to other guarantees assured the taxpayer, the Union, States, Federal District and Counties are prohibited from:
The Union is forbidden:
The States, the Federal District and the Counties are prohibited from establishing a tax differential between goods and services of any nature because of their origin or destination.
The Union has the power to levy taxes on:
The Union may impose:
The States and the Federal District have the power to impose taxes on:
The Counties shall have the power to levy taxes on:
The following shall be allocated to the States and Federal District:
The following shall be allocated to the Counties:
The revenue portions belonging to the Counties as mentioned in subparagraph IV shall be credited according the following criteria:
The Union shall turn over:
Retention or any restriction on remittance and use of the funds allocated under this section to the States, Federal District and Counties, including any tax additions and increases, is prohibited.
This prohibition does not prevent the Union and the States from conditioning delivery of funds:
A complementary law shall:
The Tribunal of Accounts of the Union shall calculate the quotas referring to the participation funds mentioned in subparagraph II.
The Union, the States, the Federal District and the Counties shall announce, by the last day of month following collection, the amounts of each of the taxes collected, the funds received, the value of the taxes remitted and to be remitted, and the numerical expression of the apportionment criteria.
The data disclosed by the Union shall be broken down by State and County, and those of the States, by County.
A complementary law shall provide for:
The power of the Union to issue currency shall be exercised exclusively through the Central Bank.
Laws initiated by the Executive shall establish:
Bills regarding the multi-year plan, budgetary directives, annual budgets and additional credits shall be examined by both Chambers of the National Congress in accordance with their common internal rules.
It is prohibited to:
One-twelfth of the funds corresponding to budgetary appropriations, including supplemental and special appropriations, destined for agencies of the Legislature, Judiciary, Public Ministry and the Public Defenders, shall be delivered to them by the twentieth day of each month, as provided for by the complementary law referred to in art. 165, § 9°.
Expenditures for active and inactive personnel of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties may not exceed the limits established by complementary law.
The economic order, founded on the appreciation of the value of human labor and free enterprise, is intended to assure everyone a dignified existence, according to the dictates of social justice, observing the following principles:
Free exercise of any economic activity is assured for all, without need for any governmental authorization, except as provided by law.
Revoked.
The law shall regulate, on the basis of national interest, foreign capital investment, granting incentives for reinvestment and regulating remittance of profits.
With the exception of the cases provided for in this Constitution, direct exploitation of an economic activity by the State shall only be permitted when necessary for the imperatives of national security or a relevant collective interest, as defined by law.
As the normative and regulatory agent of economic activity, the State, as provided by law, shall perform the functions of supervision, incentive-promotion and planning, the latter being binding for the public sector and advisory for the private sector.
The Government is responsible for providing public utility services, either directly or under regimes of concessions or permits, always through public bidding, as provided by law.
The law shall provide for:
Mineral deposits, whether being worked or not, and other mineral resources and hydraulic energy sites constitute property distinct from the soil for the effects of exploitation or use, and belong to the Union, guaranteeing to the concessionaire ownership of the output of the deposit.
The Union has a monopoly on the following:
The law shall provide for the regulation of air, water, and land transportation, and shall observe the agreements signed by the Union as to the organization of international transportation, in accordance with the principle of reciprocity.
In regulating water transportation, the law shall establish conditions under which transportation of merchandise in the coastal trade and in internal navigation may be done by foreign vessels.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall afford micro-enterprises and other small firms, as defined by law, differentiated legal treatment, seeking to stimulate them through simplification, elimination or reduction of their administrative, tax, social security and credit obligations, by means of law.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall promote and grant incentives to tourism as a factor of social and economic development.
Compliance with a request for a document or for information of a commercial nature, made by a foreign administrative or judicial authority to an individual or legal entity residing or domiciled in the Country, requires authorization from the proper governmental authority.
The urban development policy carried out by the County Governments, according to general guidelines fixed by law, is intended to order the full development of the social functions of cities and to guarantee the well-being of their inhabitants.
An individual who possesses as his own an urban area of up to two hundred and fifty square meters, for five years without interruption or opposition, using it as his or as his family's residence, shall acquire title to such property, provided that he does not own any other urban or rural property.
The Union has the power to expropriate for social interest, for purposes of agrarian reform, rural property that is not fulfilling its social function, upon prior and just compensation in agrarian debt bonds, with a clause for preservation of real value, redeemable in up to twenty years, starting from the second year after issue, and whose utilization shall be defined in law.
The following shall not be subject to expropriation for agrarian reform purposes:
The law shall guarantee special treatment for productive property and set rules for compliance with requirements for its social function.
The social function is met when rural property simultaneously complies with the following requirements, in accordance with the criteria and standards prescribed by law:
Agricultural policy shall be planned and executed as provided by law, with the effective participation of the productive sector, consisting of producers and rural workers, as well as the sectors of marketing, storage and transportation, particularly taking into account:
The use to which public and vacant lands are put shall be made compatible with agricultural policy and the national agrarian reform plan.
Beneficiaries of distribution of rural land under the agrarian reform shall receive deeds of title or concessions of use that are nonnegotiable for a period of ten years.
Deeds of title and concessions of use shall be granted to the man or woman, or to both, irrespective of their marital status, pursuant to the terms and conditions provided for by law.
The law shall regulate and limit acquisition or leasing of rural land by foreign individuals or legal entities and shall determine which cases shall require authorization from the National Congress.
Anyone who is not the owner of rural or urban property but possesses as his own for five uninterrupted years, without opposition, an area of land not exceeding fifty hectares in a rural zone and with his labor or that of his family makes the land productive and resides thereon, shall acquire ownership of the land.
Real public property may not be acquired by usucaptio.
The national financial system, structured to promote the balanced development of the country and to serve collective interests, in all its component parts, including credit cooperatives, shall be regulated by complementary laws that shall provide for, including, participation of foreign capital in the institutions of which [the national financial system] is composed.
I, II, III (a) and (b), IV, V, VI, VII, VIII; § 1°, § 2°, and § 3°. -Revoked.
The social order shall be founded on the primacy of labor and aimed at social well-being and justice.
Social security consists of an integrated group of actions initiated by the Government and society, designed to assure rights relating to health, social security and social assistance.
It is the responsibility of the Government, as provided by law, to organize social security, based on the following objectives:
Social security shall be financed by the entire society, directly and indirectly, as provided by law, through funds derived from the budgets of the Union, States, Federal District, and Counties and from the following social contributions:
Health is the right of all and the duty of the National Government and shall be guaranteed by social and economic policies aimed at reducing the risk of illness and other maladies and by universal and equal access to all activities and services for its promotion, protection and recovery.
Health activities and services are of public importance, and it is the Government's responsibility to provide, in accordance with the law, for their regulation, supervision and control. Such activities and services shall be carried out directly or through third parties and also by individuals or legal entities of private law.
Public health activities and services are part of a regionalized and hierarchical network and constitute a unified system, organized in accordance with the following directives:
Health care is open to private enterprise.
The unified health system, in addition to other duties, as provided by law, shall:
Social security shall be organized in the form of a general regime, characterized by contributions and mandatory affiliation, observing the criteria that preserve the financial and actuarial equilibrium, and shall provide for, as defined by law:
The private social security regime, in a supplementary manner and organized autonomously from the general social security regime, shall be optional, based upon the constitution of reserves that guarantee the contracted benefits, and regulated by a complementary law.
Social assistance shall be provided to those who need it, regardless of contributions to social security, and shall have the following objectives:
Government actions in the social assistance area shall be implemented with funds from the social security budget, as provided for in art. 195, along with other sources, and shall be organized on the basis of the following directives:
States and the Federal District may bind up to five-tenths of one percent of net tax receipts for support of the program for social inclusion and promotion, but these resources may not be used for payment of:
Education, which is the right of all and the duty of the National Government and family, shall be promoted and encouraged with societal collaboration, seeking the full development of the individual, preparation for the exercise of citizenship and qualification for work.
Teaching shall be provided on the basis of the following principles:
The law shall provide for the categories of workers considered elementary education professionals and for determination of the period for establishment or conformity of their career plans for the Union, States, Federal District and Counties.
Universities enjoy autonomy with respect to didactic, scientific and administrative matters, as well as autonomy in financial and patrimonial management, and shall comply with the principle of the inseparability of teaching, research and extension.
The National Government's duty towards education shall be effectuated through the guarantees of:
Education is open to private enterprise, observing the following conditions:
Minimum curricula shall be established for elementary education so as to assure a common basic education and respect for national and regional cultural and artistic values.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall collaborate in organizing their educational systems.
The Union shall apply annually not less than eighteen percent of its tax revenues, and the States, Federal District and Counties at least twenty-five percent of their tax revenues, including revenues resulting from transfers, for maintenance and development of education.
Public funds shall be allocated to public schools, and may be directed to community, religious and philanthropic schools, as defined by law, that:
The law shall establish a national educational plan, with a ten year duration, designed to articulate a national educational system in a regime of collaboration and to define the directives, objectives, goals and strategies for implementation in order to assure the maintenance and development of teaching at various levels, stages and modalities by means of integrated actions by the public powers of the different federative spheres in which it is conducted:
The National Government shall guarantee to all full exercise of cultural rights and access to sources of national culture, and shall support and grant incentives for appreciation and diffusion of cultural expression.
Brazilian cultural heritage includes material and immaterial goods, taken either individually or as a whole, that refer to the identity, action and memory of the various groups that form Brazilian society, including:
The National System of Culture, organized as a collaborative regime, in a decentralized and participative form, institutes a process of joint development and promotion of public policies of culture. These democratic and permanent policies, agreed to among the entities of the Federation and society, have the objective of promoting human, social and economic development with full exercise of cultural rights.
It is the duty of the State to foster formal and informal sporting activities as each individual's right, observing:
The State shall promote and give incentives to scientific development, research, scientific and technological training, and innovation.
The domestic market comprises part of the national patrimony and shall be encouraged to make viable cultural and socio-economic development, the well-being of the population and the technological autonomy of Brazil, as provided by federal law.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall be able to sign instruments of cooperation with public agencies and entities and with private entities, including for sharing of specialized human resources and installed capacity, for the execution of projects of research, scientific and technological development, and innovation, through counterpart financing and financing not assumed by the beneficiary entity, in the terms of the law.
The National System of Science, Technology, and Innovation (SNCTI) shall be organized under a regime of collaboration among entities, as much public as private, with a view towards promotion of scientific and technological development and innovation.
The expression of thoughts, creation, speech and information, through whatever form, process or vehicle, shall not be subject to any restrictions, observing the provisions of this Constitution.
Production and programming by radio and television stations shall comply with the following principles:
Ownership of firms of journalism and broadcasting of sounds and images with sounds is restricted to native-born Brazilians or those naturalized for more than ten years, or to legal entities organized under Brazilian law and having their headquarters in the Country.
The Executive has the power to grant and renew concessions, permits and authorizations for the services of broadcasting sounds and images with sounds, observing the principle of the complementary roles of private, public and state systems.
For the purposes of the provisions of this chapter, the National Congress shall institute, as an auxiliary agency, the Social Communications Council, as provided by law.
Everyone has the right to an ecologically balanced environment, which is a public good for the people's use and is essential for a healthy life. The Government and the community have a duty to defend and to preserve the environment for present and future generations.
The family, which is the foundation of society, shall enjoy special protection from the State.
It is the duty of the family, the society and the Government to assure children, adolescents, and youths, with absolute priority, the rights to life, health, nourishment, education, leisure, professional training, culture, dignity, respect, liberty and family and community harmony, in addition to safeguarding them against all forms of negligence, discrimination, exploitation, violence, cruelty and oppression.
Minors under eighteen years of age are not criminally responsible, subject to rules of special legislation.
Parents have a duty to assist, raise and educate their minor children, and children of age have a duty to help and support their parents in old age, need or sickness.
The family, society and the State have a duty to assist the elderly, assuring their participation in the community, defending their dignity and well-being, and guaranteeing their right to life.
The social organization, customs, languages, creeds and traditions of Indians are recognized, as well as their original rights to the lands they traditionally occupy. The Union has the responsibility to delineate these lands and to protect and ensure respect for all their property.
Indians, their communities and their organizations have standing to sue to defend their rights and interests, with the Public Ministry intervening at all stages of the proceedings.
Revoked.
The Union is prohibited from assuming, directly or indirectly, as a result of creation of a State, charges related to expenses with inactive personnel and charges and amortization of domestic and foreign debts of the public administration, including the indirect administration.
During the first ten years after creation of a State, the following basic rules shall be observed:
Notarial and registry services shall be exercised by privately upon delegation from the Government.
The Finance Ministry shall exercise the supervision and control over foreign trade, which is essential to the defense of national fiscal interests.
The law shall organize the sale and resale of petroleum fuels, fuel alcohol and other fuels derived from renewable raw materials, respecting the principles of this Constitution.
The revenues from contributions to the Program of Social Integration created by Complementary Law N°. 7 of September 7, 1970, and to the Program for the Formation of the Patrimony of Civil Servants created by Complementary Law N°. 8 of December 3, 1970, shall finance the unemployment insurance program and the bonus referred to in § 3° of this article, starting from the date of the promulgation of this Constitution.
The present compulsory contributions by employers on their payrolls, destined for private entities of social service and professional training linked to the syndicalist system, are excluded from the provisions of art. 195.
The Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall regulate by law public consortiums and cooperation agreements among the federative entities, authorizing the associated management of public services, as well as the total or partial transference of duties, services, personnel and goods essential to the continuity of the transferred services.
The principle of art. 206, IV, does not apply to official educational institutions created by state or county law, in existence on the date of promulgation of this Constitution, and that are not totally or preponderantly maintained with public funds.
Rural and urban properties in any region of Brazil on which illegal cultivation of psychotropic plants or the exploitation of slave labor, as provided by law, are found shall be expropriated and destined for agrarian reform and programs of popular housing, without any compensation to the owner and without prejudice to other sanctions provided by law, observing, to the extent applicable, the provisions of art. 5.
Any and all goods of economic value seized as a result of traffic in narcotics and similar drugs and the exploitation of slave labor shall be confiscated and shall revert to a special fund with a specific destination, as provided by law.
The law shall provide for adaptation of public sites and buildings and of existing public transportation vehicles, so as to ensure adequate access to the handicapped, pursuant to the provisions of art. 227, § 2°.
The law shall provide for circumstances and conditions under which the Government shall assist needy heirs and dependents of victims of intentional crimes, without prejudice to the civil liability of the perpetrator of the unlawful act.
No provisional measure may be adopted to regulate an article of the Constitution whose wording has been altered by means of a constitutional amendment promulgated between January 1, 1995, and the promulgation of this amendment [September 11, 2001].
The laws provided for in subparagraph III of § 1° of art. 41 and in § 7° of art. 169 shall establish special criteria and guarantees for loss of positions of tenured civil servants, who, as a result of the powers of their actual offices, perform exclusive activities of the State.
In cases of inadequate performance, loss of the office shall only occur through an administrative proceeding in which the civil servant is assured the adversary system and a full defense.
Benefits paid, for whatever reason, by the agency responsible for the general social security regime, even at the expense of the National Treasury, and not subject to the maximum limit of the value fixed for benefits conceded by this regime, shall observe the limits fixed in art. 37, XI.
To assure funds for payment of retirement and pension benefits conceded to respective civil servants and their dependents, in addition to the resources of their respective treasuries, the Union, States, Federal District and Counties may constitute funds, made up of resources from contributions and by property, rights, and assets of any nature, through a law that provides for the nature and administration of these funds.
To assure funds for payment of benefits conceded by the general social security regime, in addition to funds from collections, the Union may constitute a fund, made up of property, rights and assets of any nature, through a law that provides for the nature and administration of this fund.
At the time of its promulgation, the President of the Republic, President of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, and members of the National Congress shall take an oath to maintain, defend and comply with the Constitution.
On September 7, 1993, through a plebiscite, the electorate shall define the form of government (republic or constitutional monarchy) and the system of government (parliamentary or presidential) that shall prevail in the Country.
This Constitution shall be revised after five years, counting from its promulgation, by vote of an absolute majority of members of the National Congress in a unicameral session.
The mandate of the present President of the Republic shall end on March 15, 1990.
The provisions of art. 16 and the rules of art. 77 of the Constitution shall not apply to elections scheduled for November 15, 1988.
In the six months following promulgation of the Constitution, groups of at least thirty Federal Congressmen may request that the Superior Electoral Tribunal register a new political party; their petition is to be accompanied by the manifest, by-laws and program, duly signed by the petitioners.
Brazil shall strive for creation of an international human rights tribunal.
Amnesty is granted to those who, during the period from September 18, 1946, to the date of promulgation of the Constitution, were affected, for exclusively political reasons, by exceptional acts, either institutional or complementary, to those encompassed by Legislative Decree N°. 18 of December 15, 1961, and to those affected by Decree-Law N°. 864 of September 12, 1969, assuring during their inactivity, the promotions to the offices, positions or ranks to which they would be entitled had they been in active service, obeying the periods for remaining in positions provided for in the laws and regulations in force, respecting the characteristics and peculiarities of the careers of public civil servants and the military, observing their respective legal regimes.
Those who, for exclusively political reasons, had their mandates quashed or their political rights suspended during the period from July 15 to December 31, 1969, by acts of the then President of the Republic, may request that the Supreme Federal Tribunal recognize the rights and advantages interrupted by these punitive acts, provided that they prove that such acts were grossly flawed.
The Supreme Federal Tribunal shall render its decision within one hundred-twenty days from the interested party's request.
Until such time as the complementary law referred to in art. 7, I, of this Constitution is enacted:
Each State Legislative Assembly with constituent powers shall draft the State Constitution within one year of the promulgation of the Federal Constitution, obeying the principles of the Federal Constitution.
After a State Constitution has been promulgated, it shall be the responsibility of the County Legislatures to vote on their respective Organic Laws within six months, in two terms of discussion and voting, respecting the provisions of the Federal and State Constitutions.
Within ninety days of the promulgation of the Constitution, a Committee on Territorial Studies shall be created, with ten members appointed by the National Congress and five by the Executive, for the purpose of submitting studies concerning the national territory and draft bills on new territorial units, notably in the Legal Amazonian Region and in areas awaiting solutions.
The State of Tocantins is created by carving it out of the area described in this article, and its admission shall occur on the forty-sixth day after the elections provided for in § 3°, but not before January 1, 1989.
The Federal Territories of Roraima and of Amapá are transformed into Federated States, maintaining their current geographic borders.
The Federal Territory of Fernando de Noronha is abolished and its area is reincorporated into the State of Pernambuco.
Until the provisions of art. 32, § 2°, of the Constitution become effective, the President of the Republic, with the approval of the Federal Senate, shall be responsible for appointing the Governor and Lieutenant Governor of the Federal District.
Earnings, remuneration, advantages and additional pay, as well as retirement benefits being received inconsistently with this Constitution, shall be reduced immediately to the limits arising therefrom, not permitting invocation of vested rights nor allowing receipt of excess sums on any account.
Any legislative or administrative act, issued after installation of the National Constituent Assembly, whose objective is to grant tenure to a public servant admitted without a public competitive examination to the direct or indirect administration, including foundations instituted and maintained by the Government, is null and without legal effect.
Civil public servants of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties, in the direct administration, autarchies and public foundations, who, on the date of promulgation of the Constitution, have held their positions for at least five continuous years, without having been admitted in the manner regulated by art. 37 of the Constitution, are deemed to have tenure in the public service.
Within one hundred and eighty days, the rights of inactive civil servants and pensioners shall be revised, and the income and pensions owed them shall be updated so as to adjust them to the provisions of the Constitution.
Professional judges with a limited term of office who have been admitted by means of public competitive examinations and professional credentials and who are in office on the date this Constitution is promulgated, acquire tenure, observing the probationary period, and they shall constitute a group being phased out, maintaining the jurisdiction, prerogatives and restrictions of the laws to which they have been subjected, except for those inherent to the transitory nature of their investiture.
Retirement of the judges referred to in this article shall be regulated by the rules established for other state judges.
Public defenders holding office by the date of installation of the National Constituent Assembly are assured the right to opt for the career, observing the guarantees and prohibitions provided for in art. 134, sole paragraph, of the Constitution.
Until art. 21, XVI, of the Constitution is regulated, those presently holding the positions of federal censor shall continue to exercise functions compatible with such office in the Federal Police Department, observing the constitutional provisions.
The law referred to shall provide for the utilization of the Federal Censors, in the terms of this article.
Within eighteen months of promulgation of the Constitution, the Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall issue laws establishing criteria for making their personnel compatible with the provisions of art. 39 of the Constitution and with the administrative reform resulting therefrom.
One hundred and eighty days after promulgation of the Constitution, such period being subject to extension by law, all legal provisions conferring or delegating to an agency of the Executive, powers assigned by the Constitution to the National Congress, shall be revoked, especially with respect to:
Within one year of the promulgation of the Constitution, the National Congress shall sponsor, through a Joint Committee, an analytical and expert examination of the acts and facts that produced Brazil's foreign debt.
The Superior Tribunal of Justice shall be installed under the Presidency of the Supreme Federal Tribunal.
The federal judges referred to in art. 123, § 2°, of the Constitution of 1967, with the wording given by Constitutional Amendment No. 7 of 1977, shall be vested in office in courts of the judicial section for which they were appointed or designated; if there are no vacancies, the existing courts shall be divided.
For purposes of promotion by seniority, the period of service of such judges shall be computed from the day they took office.
Until such time as the complementary laws related to the Public Ministry and to the Advocate-General of the Union are approved, the Federal Public Ministry, Office of the Procurator of the National Treasury, Legal Advisory Offices of the Ministries, Procuracies and Legal Departments of federal autarchies with their own representation and members of the procuracies of universities that are public foundations shall continue to conduct their activities within their respective powers.
The legislation that creates the justices of the peace shall maintain the present judges of peace until the new justices take office, assuring them the rights and powers conferred upon the latter, and shall determine the date for the election provided for in art. 98, II, of the Constitution.
The clerks of the law courts, as defined by law, shall be taken over by the States, respecting the rights of the present clerks.
The provisions of art. 236 do not apply to notarial and registry services that have already been made official by the Government, respecting the rights of their employees.
Except for support payments, the value of pending court orders for payment of judgments against the government on the date of the promulgation of the Constitution, including remaining interest and monetary correction, may be paid in the currency of the day, with updating, in equal and successive annual installments, over a maximum period of eight years from July 1, 1989, by Executive decision issued within one hundred and eighty days from promulgation of the Constitution.
To comply with the provisions of this article, the debtor entities may each year issue, in the exact amount of the payment, public bonds, which shall not be computed for purposes of determining the aggregate limit of indebtedness.
The national tax system shall go into effect on the first day of the fifth month following promulgation of the Constitution; until then the system of the 1967 Constitution, with the wording given by Amendment No. 1 of 1969 and subsequent amendments, is retained.
The provisions of art. 165, § 7° shall be complied with progressively over a period of up to ten years, distributing the funds among the macro-economic regions in proportion to their population, based on the situation determined for the 1986-87 biennium.
Funds in existence on the date the Constitution is promulgated, except for those resulting from tax exemptions that become private property and those of interest to national defense, shall be eliminated if they are not ratified by the National Congress within two years.
Adaptation to what is established in art. 167, III, shall be done within five years, reducing the excess at the rate of at least one-fifth per year.
Until enactment of the complementary law referred to in art. 169, the Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall not spend more than sixty-five percent of the amount of their respective current revenues on personnel.
When the respective expenditures with personnel exceed the limit provided for in this article, the Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall return to such limit by reducing the excess percentage at the rate of one-fifth per year.
After promulgation of the Constitution, for purposes of compliance with the constitutional provisions that involve variations of expenses and receipts of the Union, the Executive shall prepare and the Legislature shall consider a bill revising the budget law of fiscal year 1989.
The National Congress shall vote on the complementary law provided for in art. 161, II, within twelve months.
The Free Trade Zone of Manaus, with its characteristics of a free trade area, export and import and fiscal incentives, shall be maintained for a period of twenty-five years from promulgation of the Constitution.
The criteria that regulate or which come to regulate approval of projects in the Free Trade Zone of Manaus may be modified only by federal law.
The Executive Branches of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall reevaluate all sectorial tax incentives now in force and shall propose the appropriate measures to their respective Legislative Branches.
For forty (40) years, the Union shall allocate from the funds destined for irrigation:
From the percentages provided for in subparagraphs I and II of the heading, a minimum of 50% (fifty percent) shall be destined for irrigation projects that benefit family farms that meet the requirements provided for in specific legislation.
On the date of the promulgation of the law regulating the prospecting and mining of mineral resources and deposits, or within one year from the date of the promulgation of this Constitution, the authorizations, concessions and other instruments conferring mineral rights shall lose their effects if one cannot prove that the prospecting or mining has been started within the legal time limits or if they have become inactive.
Brazilian firms presently owning prospecting authorizations, concessions for the working of mineral resources, and concessions for using hydraulic energy sites shall have four years, starting from the promulgation of the Constitution, to comply with the requirements of art. 176, §1°.
Refineries operating in the Country under the aegis of art. 43 and under the conditions of art. 45 of Law N°. 2.004 of October 3, 1953, are excluded from the monopoly established in art. 177, subparagraph II, of the Constitution.
Risk contracts made with Petróleo Brasileiro S.A. (Petrobrás) for the exploration of petroleum that are in force on the date of the promulgation of the Constitution are exempt from the prohibition of art. 177, §1°.
Credits with entities under intervention or extra-judicial liquidation, even when such proceedings are converted into bankruptcy, are subject to monetary correction from the date of maturity until the date of actual payment, without interruption or suspension.
The provisions of this article shall also apply:
Liquidation of debts, including subsequent renegotiations and settlements thereof, even when adjudicated, arising from any loans granted by banks and by financial institutions, shall be without monetary correction provided the loan was granted:
Within one hundred-twenty days of the promulgation of this Constitution, the National Congress shall elaborate a consumer protection code.
The law shall regulate the institution of emphyteusis in urban real property, the tenants having the option, in the event of extinction, to redeem the emphyteusis, by acquisition of direct title in accordance with the provisions contained in the respective contracts.
An agricultural law, to be enacted within one year, shall set out, in the terms of this Constitution, the objectives and instruments of agricultural policy, priorities, crop planning, marketing, internal supply, foreign markets and agrarian credit institutions.
All donations, sales and concessions of public lands of areas greater than three thousand hectares, made in the period from January 1, 1962, to December 31, 1987, shall be reviewed by the National Congress, within the three years after promulgation of the Constitution.
Until the conditions of Art. 192 are determined, the following shall be prohibited:
The prohibition referred to in this article does not apply to authorizations resulting from international accords, reciprocal agreements or agreements of interest to the Brazilian government.
Former combatants who actually participated in war operations during the Second World War, in the terms of Law No. 5.315 of September 12, 1967, shall be assured the following rights:
Granting the special pension referred to in subparagraph II replaces, for all legal effects, any other pension already granted to an ex-combatant.
When without resources, rubber-tappers recruited pursuant to Decree-Law No. 5.813 of September 14, 1943, and protected by Decree-Law No. 9.882 of September 16, 1946, shall receive a monthly pension for life in the amount of two minimum wages.
The rubber-tappers provided for in Art. 54 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act shall receive a lump-sum indemnification in the amount of R$25,000.00 (twenty-five thousand reais).
Until the law of budgetary directives is approved, at least thirty percent of the social security budget, excluding unemployment insurance, shall be allocated to the health sector.
Until a law regulates art. 195, I, the revenues resulting from at least five of the six-tenths of one percent corresponding to the rate of the contribution referred to in Decree-Law No. 1.940 of May 25, 1982, as amended by Decree-Law No. 2.049 of August 1, 1983, by Decree No. 91.236 of May 8, 1985, and by Law No. 7.611 of July 8, 1987, shall be integrated with social security revenues, except for commitments assumed for ongoing programs and projects exclusively during fiscal year 1988.
The debts of the States and Counties for social security contributions up to June 30, 1988, shall be liquidated, with monetary correction, in one hundred and twenty monthly installments, eliminating interest and penalties applicable thereto, as long as the debtors request installment payments and begin such payments within one hundred and eighty days from promulgation of this Constitution.
Benefits paid on a continuous basis and maintained by social security on the date the Constitution is promulgated shall have their values revised in order to restore their purchasing power, expressed in multiples of the minimum wage they represented on the date when they were granted, obeying this criterion for updating until implantation of the plan of funding and benefits referred to in the following article.
The monthly benefit payments, updated in accordance with this article, shall be due and payable from the seventh month after promulgation of the Constitution.
Not more than six months after the promulgation of the Constitution, bills relating to organization of social security and for the plans for funding and benefits shall be submitted to the National Congress, which shall have six months in which to examine them.
Upon approval by the National Congress, the plans shall be implemented progressively in the following eighteen months.
Until the 14th (fourteenth) year from the promulgation of this Constitutional Amendment, the States, Federal District and Counties shall apply part of the funds referred to in the heading of art. 212 of the Federal Constitution to maintenance and development of basic education and to adequate remuneration of those working in education, respecting the following provisions:
The educational entities referred to in art. 213, as well as the educational and research foundations whose creation has been authorized by law, which satisfy the requirements of subparagraphs I and II of this article and which during the last three years have received public funds, may continue to receive such funds, unless otherwise provided by law.
The law shall create the National Rural Apprenticeship Service (SENAR), modeled on the legislation for the National Industrial Apprenticeship Service (SENAI) and the National Commercial Apprenticeship Service (SENAC), without prejudice to the powers of the governmental agencies that act in the area.
A Committee composed of nine members, three from the Legislature, three from the Judiciary and three from the Executive, is created to promote commemoration of the centennial of the proclamation of the Republic and of promulgation of the first republican constitution in the Country, provided that such Committee may, at its discretion, be subdivided into as many subcommittees as may be necessary.
In carrying out its duties, the Committee shall promote studies, debates and assessments of the political, social, economic and cultural development of the Country, and may join efforts with state and county governments and with public and private institutions desiring to take part in the events.
The National Press and other printing departments of the Union, States, Federal District and Counties, of direct or indirect administration, including foundations instituted and maintained by the Government, shall provide a popular edition of the full text of the Constitution, that shall be made available, free of charge, to schools, public registry offices, syndicates, barracks, churches and other representative community organizations, so that each Brazilian citizen may receive from the Government a copy of the Brazilian Constitution.
The Legislature shall regulate art. 220, § 4° within twelve months.
The concessions of public telecommunication services presently in force are maintained, as provided by law.
The Union shall conclude the demarcation of indigenous lands within five years after promulgation of the Constitution.
Final title shall be recognized for the remaining members of the former fugitive slave communities who are occupying their lands, and the State shall grant them the respective deeds.
The States shall be allowed to maintain legal advisory offices independent from their Procuracy-Generals or Advocacy-Generals, provided that they have separate agencies for their respective functions on the date of enactment of this Constitution.
The present jurisdiction of the state courts is maintained until defined in the State Constitutions, pursuant to art. 125, § 1° of this Constitution.
For the purposes of financial restoration of the Federal Treasury and economic stabilization, the Emergency Social Fund shall be instituted in fiscal years 1994 and 1995, as well as in the periods from January 1, 1996 to June 30, 1997 and July 1, 1997 to December 31, 1999. Its resources shall be applied by giving priority to funding actions of the systems of health and education (including complementing the resources dealt with in § 3 of art. 60 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act), social security benefits and continued assistance benefits, including liquidation of the social security deficit, and the budgetary expenses associated with programs of relevant economic and social interest.
The Emergency Social Fund shall be made up of:
The instrument provided for in subparagraph V of art. 59 of the Constitution may not be utilized in regulating the Emergency Social Fund.
The Union may institute a provisional assessment on the movement or transfer of securities, credits or rights of a financial nature.
Collection of the provisional assessment on the movement or transfer of securities, credits or rights of a financial nature dealt with in art. 74 is extended for thirty-six months. This assessment was instituted by Law No. 9.311 of October 24, 1996, as amended by Law No. 9.539 of December 12, 1997, whose duration is also extended for an identical period.
Until December 31, 2023, 30% (thirty percent) of the Union’s collection of social assessments (without prejudice to payment of the expenses of the General Regime of Social Security), assessment for intervention in the economic domain, and charges, already instituted or that are created by the referred to date, are unlinked from the agency, fund or expense.
Until December 31, 2023, the receipts of the States and Federal District from taxes, charges and fines, already instituted or that are created by the referred to date, as well as their surcharges and respective legal increments and other current receipts, are unlinked from the agency, fund or expense.
The following are exceptions from the unlinking dealt with in the initial paragraph:
Until December 31, 2023, the receipts of the Counties from taxes, charges and fines, already instituted or that are created by the referred to date, as well as their surcharges and respective legal increments and other current receipts, are unlinked from the agency, fund or expense.
The following are exceptions from the unlinking dealt with in the initial paragraph:
Until the fiscal year 2004, the minimum resources applied in public health activities and services shall be equivalent to:
Except for the credits defined by law as small amounts, those of a support nature, those dealt with in art. 33 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act and their complementary provisions, and those that have had their respective funds liberated or deposited with the court, the judicial orders of payment pending on the date of the promulgation of this Amendment and those stemming from initial actions adjudicated by December 31st, 1999, shall be liquidated in currency at their real value, plus legal interest, in annual equal and successive installments over a maximum period of ten years. These credits may be assigned.
The Fund for the Combat and Eradication of Poverty is created within the sphere of the Federal Executive, effective until the year 2010* [extended indefinitely by Amendment No. 67 of Dec. 22, 2010]. The Fund is to be regulated by a complementary law whose purpose is to make it viable for all Brazilians to have access to dignified levels of subsistence. The Fund's resources shall be applied to supplement nutrition, housing, education, health, reinforcement of family income and other social interest programs designed to improve the quality of life.
The Fund provided for in this article shall have an Accompanying Consultative Council with participation by representatives of civil society, as provided for by law.
The Fund for the Combat and Eradication of Poverty shall consist of:
A Fund is created, constituted with the resources received by the Union from privatization of mixed-capital companies or firms controlled, either directly or indirectly, by the State, when the operation involves alienation of respective shareholder control to a person or entity that is not a part of the public administration, or the shareholder participation remaining after alienation. Starting on June 18, 2002, the earnings generated by this Fund shall revert to the Fund for the Combat and Eradication of Poverty.
The States, the Federal District, and the Counties shall institute Funds for the Combat of Poverty, with the resources dealt with in this article and others that shall come to be earmarked for them. These Funds shall be managed by entities in which civil society participates.
Federal law shall define the superfluous products and services referred to in arts. 80, II, and 82, § 2°.
The provisional assessment on transactions or transference of securities, credits or rights of a financial nature, provided for in arts. 74, 75 and 80, I, of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, shall be collected until December 31, 2004.
As of the thirtieth day from the publication date of this Constitutional Amendment, the assessment referred to in art. 84 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act shall not be imposed on these transactions:
Debts of the federal, state, district or county treasuries stemming from final non-appealable judgments shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of art. 100 of the Federal Constitution. The rule of installment payments established in the heading of art. 78 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act shall not apply to them if they cumulatively meet the following conditions:
Until the official publication of the respective definitive laws by entities of the Federation, for the purposes of § 3° of art. 100 of the Federal Constitution and art. 78 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, observing the provisions of § 4° of art. 100 of the Federal Constitution, debts or obligations consigned in a judicial order of payment shall be considered of small value when they have a value equal or inferior to:
If the value of the execution exceeds what has been established in this article, payment shall always be made by means of a judicial order of payment, but the party seeking execution has the option of waiving credit for the value in excess thereof in order to opt for payment of the balance without a judicial order of payment in the manner provided for in § 3° of art. 100.
So long as a complementary law does not regulate the provisions of subparagraphs I and III of § 3° of art. 156 of the Federal Constitution, the tax referred to in subparagraph III of the heading of the same article:
Career members of the military police and municipal employees of the ex-Federal Territory of Rondônia, who duly prove that in the regular exercise of their functions they performed services in that ex-Territory on the date it was transformed into a State, as well as the employees and Military Police covered by the provisions of art. 36 of Complementary Law No. 41 of December 22, 1981, and those regularly admitted into the personnel of the State of Rondônia prior to the date of the taking of office by the first elected Governor, on March 15, 1987, shall constitute, via option, terminated personnel of the federal administration, assuring the rights and advantages inherent therein, prohibiting payment in any respect for remuneratory differences.
The period provided for in the heading of art. 84 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act shall be extended until December 31, 2007.
The Union shall turn over to the States and the Federal District the amount defined in a complementary law, in accordance with the criteria, periods and conditions determined therein, being able to consider primary and semi-manufactured product exports, the relation between exports and imports, the credits stemming from purchases destined for fixed assets and the effect of maintenance and approval of a credit for the tax referred to in art. 155, § 2°, X, a.
The period fixed in art. 40 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act shall be increased by ten years.
The period fixed by art. 92 of the Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act is increased by 50 (fifty) years.
The provisions of art. 159, III, and § 4° shall go into force only after enactment of the law dealing with the referred to subparagraph III.
The special regimes for taxation of micro-firms and small firms belonging to the Union, States, Federal District and Counties shall cease upon the entry into force of the regime provided for in art. 146, III, d, of the Constitution.
Those born abroad between June 7, 1994, and the date of promulgation of this Constitutional Amendment, who are children of a Brazilian father or mother, may be registered at the appropriate Brazilian embassy or consulate or, if they come to reside in the Federative Republic of Brazil, at a registry office.
The acts of creation, merger, incorporation and dismantling of Counties whose laws have been published by December 31, 2006, are validated, taking into account the requirements established in the respective State legislation at the time of their creation.
Until the complementary law dealt with in § 15° of art. 100 of the Federal Constitution is enacted, the States, Federal District and Counties that, on the date of the publication of this Constitutional Amendment, have failed to pay past due precatórios with respect to their direct and indirect administration, including those issued during the period of the special regime instituted by this article, shall make these payments in accordance with the norms that are established below. The provisions in art. 100 of this Federal Constitution are inapplicable except for §§ 2°, 3°, 9°, 10°, 11°, 12°, 13° and 14°, without prejudice to agreements from conciliatory transactions already formalized on the date of the promulgation of this Constitutional Amendment.
The number of public defenders in the jurisdictional unit shall be proportional to the effective demand for the services of the Public Defender’s Office and the respective population.
For the purposes of the provision in subparagraph VII of § 20 of art. 155, in the case of transactions and performances that send goods and services to a non-taxpayer final consumer located in another State, the tax corresponding to the difference between the internal rate and the interstate rate shall be split between the States of origin and destination, in the following proportion:
Until the entry into force of the complementary law dealt with in subparagraph II of § l° of art. 40 of the Federal Constitution, the Ministers of the Supreme Federal Tribunal, of the Superior Tribunals and the Tribunal of Accounts of the Union shall compulsorily retire at age 75 (seventy-five) years of age, in the conditions of art. 52 of the Federal Constitution.
The States, the Federal District, and the Counties that were in default on the payment of their judicial orders of payment on March 25, 2015, shall pay off these overdue debts by December 31, 2020, as well as those debts that become due during this period, depositing monthly in a special account in the local Tribunal of Justice, under the sole and exclusive administration of this Tribunal, 1/12 (one-twelfth) of the calculated percentage value of their respective current net receipts, determined in the second month prior to the month of payment, in a percentage sufficient for the satisfaction of their debts and, even though variable, never less than in each financial year the average of the compromised percentage of the current net receipts in the period from 2012 to 2014, in conformity with a plan for payment to be presented annually to the local Tribunal of Justice.
So long as the special regime provided for in this Constitutional Amendment is in force, at least 50% (fifty percent) of the resources which, in the terms of art. 101 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, are destined for satisfaction of judicial orders of payment in default shall be utilized for their payment in accordance with the chronological order of presentation, respecting the preferences of support creditors and those with respect to age, state of health, and handicaps in the terms of §2° of art. 100 of the Federal Constitution, over all the other credits for all years.
Application of the rest of the resources, at the option of the States, Federal District and Counties, by act of their respective Executives, observing the order of preferences of creditors, may be destined for payment through direct settlements, via the Auxiliary Courts for Settlement of Judicial Orders of Payment, with a maximum reduction of 40% (forty percent) of the value of the updated credit, so long as no appeal or judicial defense is pending with respect to the credit and that the requirements set forth in the regulations issued by the federative entity are observed.
So long as the States, Federal District and Counties are effectuating payment of the monthly amounts owed as provided in the heading of art. 101 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, neither they, nor their respective dependent autarchies, foundations, or state enterprises may suffer seizure of assets, except for failure to release resources on time.
If the resources referred to in art. 101 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act for the satisfaction of judicial orders of payment are not released on time, either in whole or in part:
So long as the omission persists, the federative entity may not contract foreign or domestic loans, except for the purposes provided for in §2° of art. 101 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act, and shall be prohibited from receiving voluntary transfers.
So long as the regime for payment of judicial orders of payment provided for in at. 101 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act remains in force, creditors of judicial orders of payment, whether their own or of third parties, may use them as a setoff for tax debts or other kinds of debts that by March 25, 2015, have been inscribed in the active debt of the States, the Federal District or the Counties, observing the requirements defined in the federative entity’s own law.
Any type of linking, such as transferences to other entities and those destined to education, health or purposes, shall not apply to the setoffs referred to in the heading of this article.
The New Fiscal Regime is instituted in the ambit of Fiscal Budgets and the Union’s Social Security and shall be in force for twenty fiscal years, in the terms of arts. 107 to 111 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act.
In each fiscal year individualized limits are established for primary expenses:
Starting in the tenth fiscal year of the New Fiscal Regime, the President of the Republic may propose a draft of a complementary law for alteration of the method of correction of the limits referred to in subparagraph II of §1° of art. 107 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act.
Only one alteration of the method of correction of the limits shall be permitted in a presidential mandate.
In the case of noncompliance with an individualized limit, the following prohibitions shall be applied to the Executive or the organs designated in subparagraphs II to V of the heading of art. 107 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act that failed to comply, until the end of the fiscal year in which expenses return to their respective limits, without prejudice to other measures:
During the time the New Fiscal Regime is in force, the minimum applications in public health activities and services and in the maintenance and development of education shall be equal to:
From fiscal year 2018 until the last fiscal year that the New Fiscal Regime is in force, the approval and execution provided for in §§9° and 11 of art. 166 of the Federal Constitution shall correspond to the amount for mandatory execution for fiscal year 2017, corrected in the manner established by subparagraph II of §1° of art. 107 of this Transitional Constitutional Provisions Act.
The provisions introduced by the New Fiscal Regime:
A legislative proposal that creates or alters mandatory expenses or renounces receipts shall be  accompanied by an estimate of its budgetary and financial effects.
Transmission of the legislative proposals designated in the heading of art. 59 of the Federal Constitution, with the exception of that referred to in subparagraph V, whenever they occasion an increase in expenses or renunciation of receipts, shall be suspended for up to twenty days, at the request of one fifth of the members of the Chamber, in accordance with its internal regulations, for analysis of its compatibility with the New Fiscal Regime.
