WHEREAS provision is being made in a separate Proclamation (in this Constitution referred to as “the Succession and Regency Proclamation, 1959”) for certain matters affecting His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, the Succession to the Sultanate and His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s family;
WHEREAS WE intend to govern in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution and the laws of Brunei Darussalam and, by progressive steps hereafter, to introduce further representative institutions into the government of Brunei Darussalam;
AND WHEREAS WE have, with the advice and consent of OUR traditional advisers, decided to make such provisions for the regulation of the government of Brunei Darussalam as is hereinafter contained;
NOW, THEREFORE, WE by the rights and powers of OUR Prerogatives as Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of the Sovereign State and Territory of Brunei Darussalam and all its Dependencies, do HEREBY PROCLAIM in OUR name and on OUR behalf and for and on behalf of OUR SUCCESSORS as hereinafter follows:
This Constitution may be cited as the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam.
“Auditor General” means the officer appointed under Clause (1) of Article 66;
“Brunei Investment Agency” means the body corporate established by the Brunei Investment Agency Act (Chapter 137);
“Chief Syar’ie Judge” means the Chief Syar’ie Judge appointed under the Syariah Courts Act (Chapter 184);
“citizen of Brunei Darussalam” means a subject of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan by virtue of the provisions of any written law relating to nationality;
“Civil List” means the provision made for the maintenance of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, His Consort and other members of the Royal Family out of public funds;
“Clerk to the Legislative Council” includes any person appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan to be Deputy Clerk to that Council;
“Clerk to the Privy Council” includes any person appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan to be Deputy Clerk to that Council;
“Council of Ministers” means the Council of Ministers established by Article 10;
“Council of Regency” means the Council of Regency appointed under the Succession and Regency Proclamation, 1959;
“debt” includes any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee;
“Deputy Minister” means any person appointed under Clause (3) of Article 4;
“Deputy Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan” means the person appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan under the Succession and Regency Proclamation, 1959;
“Government” means the Government of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan;
“high judicial office” means the office of a Judge of the Supreme Court, or of a court having unlimited jurisdiction in civil or criminal matters, or of a court having jurisdiction in appeals from any such court;
“His Majesty” or “His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan” means—
“His Majesty in Council” or “His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan in Council” means His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan acting after consultation with the Council of Ministers, but not necessarily in accordance with the advice of that Council nor necessarily in that Council assembled;
“instrument” includes any publication in the Gazette, whether or not such publication merely purports to publish the doing of an act or the occurrence of a fact or event, or otherwise conveys or purports to convey information;
“Islamic Religion” means the Islamic Religion according to the Shafeite sect of Ahlis Sunnah Waljamaah;
“Kepala Wazir” means the noble and illustrious personage known as the Duli Pengiran Perdana Wazir Sahibul Himmah Wal-Waqar;
“Legislative Council” means the Legislative Council established by Article 23;
“meeting”, in relation to the Legislative Council, means all sittings of that Council held during a period beginning when that Council first meets after being summoned at any time and ending when that Council is next thereafter either adjourned sine die or prorogued or dissolved without having been prorogued;
“Minister” means a person appointed under Clause (3) of Article 4;
“Mufti Kerajaan” means the person appointed as such by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan under the Religious Council and Kadis Courts Act (Chapter 77);
“Muslim revenue and funds” means all revenues and funds to which Part IV of the Religious Council and Kadis Courts Act (Chapter 77) applies;
“pension rights” includes superannuation rights and provident funds rights;
“Privy Council” means the Privy Council established by Clause (1) of Article 5;
“public office” means any office of emolument, remuneration or allowance (including pension or other like allowance) in respect of his tenure in the Government but does not include the Sultanate, the office of Regent, Kepala Wazir, Wazir, Chief Justice, Speaker of the Legislative Council, Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Council, Minister, Deputy Minister, Parliamentary Secretary, Political Secretary, Member of the Legislative Council, Ambassador, High Commissioner, Judge of the Supreme Court, Consul-General, Consul or such other office as His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may by order published in the Gazette, prescribe;
“public officer” means the holder of any public office and includes any person appointed to act in any such office;
“Regent” means a Regent duly appointed under or referred to in the Succession and Regency Proclamation, 1959;
“Religious Council” means the Religious Council constituted by Part II of the Religious Council and Kadis Courts Act (Chapter 77);
“Secretary to the Council of Ministers” means the person appointed under Article 22 and includes any person appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan to be Deputy Secretary to that Council;
“session”, in relation to the Legislative Council, means the meeting of that Council commencing when it first meets after being constituted under this Constitution, or after its prorogation or dissolution at any time, and terminating when that Council is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
“sitting”, in relation to the Legislative Council, means the period during which that Council is sitting continuously without adjournment, and includes any period during which that Council is in Committee;
“Speaker” means the Speaker of the Legislative Council appointed under Clause (1) of Article 37 and includes any person appointed to be his Deputy;
“Standing Orders” means the Standing Orders of the Legislative Council made pursuant to Article 48;
“State Seal” means the Seal of Brunei Darussalam referred to in Article 79;
“Supreme Court” means the Supreme Court of Brunei Darussalam established under the Supreme Court Act (Chapter 5);
“tax” includes an impost or a duty but does not include a rate levied for local purposes or a fee for services rendered;
“Wazirs” means the Duli Pengiran Perdana Wazir Sahibul Himmah Wal-Waqar, the Pengiran Bendahara Seri Maharaja Permaisuara, the Pengiran Digadong Sahibul Mal, the Pengiran Pemancha Sahibul Rae’ Wal-Mashuarah and the Pengiran Temanggong Sahibul Bahar;
“written law” includes all Acts, Orders, Proclamations and subsidiary legislation, or any part thereof, but does not include any Act of Parliament of the United Kingdom or any Order of Her Britannic Majesty in Council or any Law which no authority in Brunei Darussalam is empowered to amend;
“Yang Di-Pertua Adat Istiadat” means the noble and illustrious personage known as the Duli Pengiran Pemancha or the person appointed under Clause (3) of Article 3A by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan.
Provided that all other religions may be practised in peace and harmony by the persons professing them.
Provided that His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan is not bound to act in accordance with the advice of the Adat Istiadat Council.
Provided that His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may revoke the appointment of any Minister or Deputy Minister at any time without showing cause.
Provided that His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may transfer any functions, powers and duties conferred on any person by the existing Instruments to such other person or authority as may be specified by such order at any time without showing cause.
[*As at the time of this Reprint, His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan has, pursuant to the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), conferred on the Privy Council the function to advise His Majesty in connection with the exercise of His Majesty’s powers under Clause (1) of Article 9 of the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam.]
[*Article 8A was not in operation at the date of this Reprint. This Article was suspended by the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), with effect from 21st February 2006.]
[*Article 8A was not in operation at the date of this Reprint. This Article was suspended by the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), with effect from 21st February 2006.]
[**As at the time of this Reprint, His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan has, pursuant to the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), conferred on the Privy Council the function to advise His Majesty in connection with the exercise of His Majesty’s powers under Clause (1) of Article 9 of the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam.]
[***Clauses (2), (4) and (5) of Article 9 were not in operation at the date of this Reprint. These Clauses were suspended by the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), with effect from 21st February 2006.]
[***Clauses (2), (4) and (5) of Article 9 were not in operation at the date of this Reprint. These Clauses were suspended by the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), with effect from 21st February 2006.]
[***Clauses (2), (4) and (5) of Article 9 were not in operation at the date of this Reprint. These Clauses were suspended by the Constitution of Brunei Darussalam (Suspension) Order, 2006 (S 15/06), with effect from 21st February 2006.]
There shall be established a Council of Ministers (to be known in Malay as the Majlis Mesyuarat Menteri-Menteri), constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
The Council of Ministers shall consist of the Prime Minister and the Ministers appointed under Clause (3) of Article 4.
Subject to this Constitution, every Minister shall hold his seat in the Council of Ministers during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure.
Whenever His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan or in his absence, other person presiding decides to obtain the advice of any person touching the affairs of the Government, he may require such person to attend any meeting of the Council of Ministers for such purpose.
The Members of the Council of Ministers shall have seniority and precedence amongst themselves in that Council as His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may assign.
In the absence of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, the person who shall preside shall be the Member of the Council of Ministers present who stands first in order of precedence according to Article 15.
Provided that, in every case falling within paragraph (c), His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall, as soon as practicable, inform the Council of Ministers of the measures which he has adopted with the reasons therefor.
No decision of the Council of Ministers shall be valid unless approved by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan.
Every Member of the Council of Ministers, other than the Prime Minister, shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take or make before His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, or some other person authorised by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, an oath or declaration in the form set out as Form III in the First Schedule:
Provided that any person who, having previously been a Member of that Council, again becomes a Member of that Council within one month after the termination of his previous membership thereof may enter on the duties of his office without again taking or making such oath or declaration.
There shall be established a Legislative Council (to be known in Malay as Majlis Mesyuarat Negara), constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
Subject to Article 30, any person (other than a Regent) who is a citizen of Brunei Darussalam and who has attained the age of 21 years shall be qualified to be a Member of the Legislative Council.
No person shall be qualified to be a Member of the Legislative Council who—
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to any person—
Provided that where the Member is declared by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan to be incapable of discharging his functions, the Legislative Council shall not have the power to declare such Member to be again capable of discharging his functions without the prior approval of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan.
Provided that where the Member is suspended by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, the Legislative Council shall not have the power to end the suspension of such Member without the prior approval of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall have exclusive jurisdiction to determine any question on whether—
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may, by Instrument under the State Seal, appoint a person to be a Member for the period of such vacancy.
Provided that the Speaker or Deputy Speaker may, by writing under his hand addressed to His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, resign his office and, in the case of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker appointed from among the Members of the Legislative Council, shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a Member of that Council.
The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, as the case may be, shall so far as practicable, attend and preside at all meetings of the Legislative Council, and in their absence such Member of that Council as the Speaker or Deputy Speaker may, after consultation with His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, generally or specially appoint, shall preside.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall have the power to make laws for the peace, order, security and good government of Brunei Darussalam.
All laws shall be styled Acts and the enacting words shall be “Be it enacted by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council as follows:”.
Every Member of the Legislative Council shall, before entering upon the duties of his office and taking his seat, take or make and subscribe before the Speaker or Deputy Speaker or other Member presiding an oath or declaration in the form set out as Form IV in the First Schedule:
Provided that any person who, having previously been a Member of the Legislative Council, again becomes a Member of that Council within one month after the termination of his previous membership thereof may enter upon the duties of his office and take his seat without again taking or making and subscribing such oath or declaration.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall appoint some fit and proper person to be the Clerk to the Legislative Council, and who shall hold the office during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure, and such person shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take before the Speaker or other Member presiding an oath in the form set out as Form V in the First Schedule.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall have the right to address the Legislative Council at any time upon any matter.
No tax or rate shall be levied by or for the purposes of Brunei Darussalam except by or under the authority of law.
All revenues and moneys howsoever raised or received by the Government from whatsoever source shall, subject to this Constitution and any written law, be paid into and form one fund to be known as the “Consolidated Fund”.
The heads of expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund but not charged thereon other than expenditure to be met by such sums as are mentioned in Clause (3) of Article 60, shall be included in a Bill, to be known as the Annual Supply Bill, providing the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the application of those sums for the purposes specified therein.
If, in respect of any financial year, it is found—
a Supplementary Estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be caused by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan to be laid before the Legislative Council and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a Supplementary Supply Bill.
The Legislative Council shall have power in respect of any financial year—
The Auditor General shall submit his reports to His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan who may cause the reports to be laid before the Legislative Council.
The provisions of this Part shall not be applicable to Muslim revenues and funds.
Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, every person holding office in the public service of the Government shall hold office during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure.
There shall be a Secretary to the Public Service Commission who shall be appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, and who shall hold office during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure.
Every person appointed to be a member of the Public Service Commission shall be paid such salary or allowances, or both, as may be determined by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan; and all such salaries and allowances shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may make regulations to provide for—
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may, whenever he thinks fit, require any person in the public service of Brunei Darussalam to take or make before him or such person as he may appoint, an oath or declaration of allegiance in the form set out as Form VI in the First Schedule.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan shall keep and use the State Seal for sealing all things whatsoever that shall pass that State Seal.
Provided that, except in so far as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of this Clause, no appointment made by virtue hereof shall have effect before the commencement of that Part;
Provided that if, while a Proclamation of Emergency is in force in any part of Brunei Darussalam, another Proclamation of Emergency is made in respect of any other part of Brunei Darussalam, any Order already made and still in force when the last Proclamation comes into operation shall, forthwith, have effect in the part of Brunei Darussalam specified in the last Proclamation.
shall be deemed to have been validly passed or made, to be fully effectual and to have had full force and effect from the date on which such Proclamation, Order, Instrument, Act, Enactment or other written law was declared or made even if such Proclamation, Order, Instrument, Act, Enactment or other written law was inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution; and the said Proclamation, Order, Instrument, Act, Enactment or other written law referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) shall be deemed to have been duly laid before and passed by the Legislative Council in accordance with Clause (7) of Article 83.
Provided that, subject to Article 84C, provision may be made by written law for the bringing of proceedings against the Government or any officer, servant or agent thereof, but not His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan, in respect of wrongs committed in the course of carrying on the government of Brunei Darussalam.
Laws of Brunei Darussalam may have extra-territorial effect, provided it is so stated in such laws.
Provided that the court shall not refer such question which has already been decided by the Interpretation Tribunal.
The Chairman and other members shall be appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan by Instrument under the State Seal, and shall hold office during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure.
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI (for Muslims only)
I, .......... of His Majesty’s Privy Council being an ex-officio Member/having been appointed a Member (delete words not required) swear by Almighty ALLAH/solemnly and sincerely declare (delete words not required) that, except with the authority of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan I will not directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Privy Council, or the nature or contents of any documents communicated to me as a Member of the Council, or any matter coming to my knowledge in my capacity as a Member of the Council and that in all things I will be a true and faithful Privy Councillor.
Dated this ........................................ day of ........................................ 20 ...............
.................................................. Signature
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI
I, .......... having been appointed Clerk/Secretary (delete words not required) to the Privy Council/Council of Ministers (delete words not required) swear by Almighty ALLAH that I will not directly or indirectly reveal such matters as shall be debated in the Council and committed to my secrecy but that I will well and truly serve in the said office as Clerk/Secretary (delete words not required) to the Privy Council/Council of Ministers (delete words not required)
Dated this ....................................... day of ........................................ 20 ...............
................................................. Signature
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI (for Muslims only)
I, .......... having been appointed a Member of the Council of Ministers swear by Almighty ALLAH/solemnly and sincerely declare (delete words not required) that, except with the authority of His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan I, .......... will not directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Council of Ministers, or the nature or contents of any document communicated to me as a Member of the Council, or any matter coming to my knowledge in my capacity as a Member of the Council, and that in all things I will be a true and faithful Member of the Council of Ministers.
Dated this ........................................ day of ........................................20 ...............
.................................................. Signature
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI (for Muslims only)
I, .......... having been appointed or elected a Member of the Legislative Council swear by Almighty ALLAH/solemnly and sincerely declare (delete words not required) that I will to the best of my ability and judgment, serve as a true and faithful Member of the Legislative Council.
Dated this ....................................... day of ........................................ 20 ...............
.................................................. Signature
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI
I, .......... having been appointed Clerk to the Legislative Council swear by Almighty ALLAH that I will well and truly serve in the said office of Clerk to the Legislative Council.
Dated this ........................................ day of ........................................ 20 ...............
.................................................. Signature
WALLAHI WA-BILLAHI WA-TAALLAHI (for Muslims only)
I, .......... swear by Almighty ALLAH/solemnly and sincerely declare (delete words not required) that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan .......... and His Successors according to law. That I will without fear or favour and to the best of my ability and judgment, serve as a true and faithful member of the public service of Brunei Darussalam.
Dated this ........................................ day of ........................................ 20 ...............
.................................................. Signature
The Legislative Council shall consist of not more than 45 Members as follows—
The Members of the Legislative Council who are appointed in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) of paragraph 1 shall be appointed by His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan by Instrument under the State Seal.
Every Member of the Legislative Council shall hold his seat in that Council during His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan’s pleasure and, subject thereto, shall hold office in accordance with such terms as may be specified in the Instrument of appointment which may include a provision specifying the constituency or electoral area for which he may be made responsible.
His Majesty the Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan may make regulations for the purposes of carrying out any provision of this Schedule.
Auditor General
Clerk to the Privy Council
Clerk to the Legislative Council
Chief Syar’ie Judge
Mufti Kerajaan
Attorney General
Chairman of the Public Service Commission
Yang Di-Pertua Adat Istiadat
Speaker of the Legislative Council
Secretary to the Council of Ministers
