We, the Members of the Seventh Grand National Assembly, guided by our desire to express the will of the people of Bulgaria, by pledging our loyalty to the universal human values of liberty, peace, humanism, equality, justice and tolerance;
by holding as the highest principle the rights, dignity and security of the individual;
in awareness of our irrevocable duty to guard the national and state integrity of Bulgaria,
hereby proclaim our resolve to create a democratic and social state, governed by the rule of law, by establishing this CONSTITUTION.
Bulgarian shall be the official language of the Republic.
* The term "citizens" refers to all individuals to whom this Constitution applies.
The State shall be held liable for any damages caused by unlawful acts or actions on the part of its agencies and officials.
The power of the State shall be divided between legislative, executive and judicial branches.
All elections, and national and local referendums shall be held on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot.
The family, motherhood and children shall enjoy the protection of the State and society.
The Republic of Bulgaria shall ensure the protection and reproduction of the environment, the conservation of living Nature in all its variety, and the sensible utilization of the country's natural and other resources.
Labour shall be guaranteed and protected by law.
The State shall establish conditions conducive to the balanced development of the different regions of the country, and shall assist the territorial bodies and activities through its fiscal, credit and investment policies.
The State shall establish conditions conducive to the free development of science, education and the arts, and shall assist that development. It shall organize the conservation of all national monuments of history and culture.
Everyone shall have the right to life. Any attempt upon a human life shall be punished as a most severe crime.
No one shall be persecuted or restricted in his rights because of his views, nor shall be obligated or forced to provide information about his own or another person's views.
All citizens shall have the right to lodge complaints, proposals and petitions with the state authorities.
Workers and employees shall have the right to strike in defence of their collective economic and social interests. This right shall be exercised in accordance with conditions and procedures established by law.
Everyone shall have the right to a healthy and favorable environment corresponding to established standards and norms. They shall protect the environment.
Everyone shall have the right to legal defence whenever his rights or legitimate interests are violated or endangered. He shall have the right to be accompanied by legal counsel when appearing before an agency of the State.
Citizens shall assist the State and society in the case of a natural or other disaster, on conditions and in a manner established by law.
The National Assembly shall consist of 240 members.
The legitimacy of an election may be contested before the Constitutional Court by a procedure established by law.
Members of the National Assembly shall not be held criminally liable for their opinions or votes in the National Assembly.
The National Assembly shall establish the emoluments of its Members.
The National Assembly shall be organized and shall act in accordance with the Constitution and its own internal rules.
The National Assembly shall be a permanently acting body. It shall be free to determine its recesses.
A newly elected National Assembly shall be convened for a first session by the President of the Republic within a month following its election. Should the President fail to do so, it shall be convened by one-fifth of the Members of the National Assembly.
"I swear in the name of the Republic of Bulgaria to observe the Constitution and the laws of the country and in all my actions to be guided by the interests of the people. I have sworn."
The National Assembly shall be convened for its sessions by its Chairperson:
Any official or citizen subpoenaed by a parliamentary committee shall be obligated to testify and present any required documents.
Sessions of the National Assembly shall be public. The National Assembly may by exception resolve to hold some sessions behind closed doors.
The National Assembly shall:
The Vice President shall be elected at the same time and on the same ticket as the President, on the same conditions and by the same procedure.
The President and the Vice President shall swear before the National Assembly the oath established by Article 76 para 2.
The President of the Republic shall:
The President shall be free to devolve to the Vice President the prerogatives established by Article 98 items 7, 9, 10 and 11.
The Council of Ministers shall manage the implementation of the state budget; organize the management of the state's assets; conclude, confirm or denounce international treaties when authorized to do so by law.
The Council of Ministers shall rescind any illegitimate or improper act issued by a minister.
The members of the Council of Ministers shall swear before the National Assembly an oath envisaged in Article 76 para 2.
Eligible for election to the Council of Ministers shall be any Bulgarian citizen qualified to be elected to the National Assembly.
Pursuant to and in implementation of the laws, the Council of Ministers shall adopt decrees, ordinances and resolutions. The Council of Ministers shall drafts rules and regulations by decree.
The ministers shall issue rules, regulations, instructions and orders.
All judicial power shall be exercised in the name of the people.
Court assessors shall participate in the trial process in certain cases established by law.
The Supreme Court of Cassation shall exercise supreme judicial oversight as to the precise and equal application of the law by all courts.
The investigating magistracy shall be within the system of the judiciary. They shall conduct investigation of criminal cases where it is prescribed by the law.
The Minister of Justice:
(Revoked - SG 100/2015)
The organization and the activity of the Supreme Judicial Council, of the courts, the prosecution office and the investigating magistracy, the status of the judges, prosecutors and investigating magistrates, the conditions and the procedure for the appointment and removal from office of judges, court assessors, prosecutors and investigating magistrates and the materialization of their liability shall be established by law.
The body of local self-government within a municipality shall be a municipal council elected directly by the populace for a term of four years by a procedure envisaged by the law.
A municipality shall be entitled to own municipal property, which it shall use to the interest of the territorial community.
The region shall be an administrative territorial unit for the conduct of a regional policy, the implementation of state governance on a local level, and the ensuring the concurrance of national and local interests.
The central bodies of State and their territorial sub divisions shall exercise control over the legality of the acts of the bodies of local government only when authorized to do so by law.
A municipal council shall be free to challenge before a court any act which infringes its rights.
The organization and the procedures of the bodies of local self-government and local administration shall be established by law.
The organization and the manner of proceeding of the Constitutional Court shall be established by law.
The National Assembly shall be free to amend all provisions of the Constitution except those within the prerogatives of the Grand National Assembly.
An amendment to the Constitution shall be signed and promulgated in State Gazette by the Chairperson of the Grand National Assembly within seven days of being passed.
A Grand National Assembly shall consist of 400 Members elected according to the election law in force.
A Grand National Assembly shall:
To pass a bill, the Grand National Assembly shall require a majority of two-thirds of the votes of all Members, in three ballots on three different days.
An Act of the Grand National Assembly shall be signed and promulgated in State Gazette by the Assembly's Chairperson within seven days of it being passed.
The coat of arms of the Republic of Bulgaria shall depict a gold lion rampant on a dark gules shield.
The state seal shall depict the coat of arms of the Republic of Bulgaria.
The flag of the Republic of Bulgaria shall be a tricolor: white, green, and red from top, placed horizontally.
The rules for the placing of the state seal and the raising of the national flag shall be established by law.
The National Anthem of the Republic of Bulgaria shall be the song "Mila Rodino".
The Republic of Bulgaria shall have for its capital the City of Sofia.
Pending the election of a Supreme Court of Cassation and a Supreme Administrative Court, their prerogatives pursuant to Article 130 para 3 and Article 147 para 1 of the Constitution shall be exercised by the Supreme Court of the Republic of Bulgaria.
The organization of the judiciary established by the Constitution shall come into force following the passing of the new structural and procedural laws within the term established by para 2 of Article 3.
Judges, prosecutors and investigating magistrates shall become irremovable if within three months of its formation the Supreme Judicial Council does not rule that they lack the necessary professional merits.
Pending the passing of new legislation concerning Bulgarian National Television, Bulgarian National Radio and the Bulgarian News Agency, the National Assembly shall practise the prerogatives vested in the Grand National Assembly with respect to these national institutions.
The government shall continue to perform its functions pursuant to this Constitution until the formation of a new government.
This Constitution shall enter into force on the day on which it is promulgated in State Gazette by the Chairperson of the Grand National Assembly, and shall supersede the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria adopted on May 18th, 1971
The heads of the judicial bodies who, until the entry into force of this Law, have occupied the respective administrative position for more than 5 years, may be appointed to the same position for only one more mandate.
The judges, prosecutors and investigating magistrates who by the time of entry into force of this Law have not completed the 3-year term of office on the respective position, shall become irremovable under the terms of Article 1, item 1, of this Law.
Article 1, item 3, shall enter into force as of 1 January 2004.
Article 2 shall enter into force as of the date of entry into force of the Treaty concerning the Accession of the Republic of Bulgaria to the European Union and shall not apply to international treaties found.
The National Assembly shall pass the laws referring to the application of these amendments and supplements, within one year following the entry into force of the Law Amending and Supplementing the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.
Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall enter into force from 1 January 2008.
Within three months after the entry into force of this Act, the National Assembly shall adopt the laws which concern the application of Articles 130a and 130b of the Constitution of the Republic of Bulgaria.
The elective members of the Supreme Judicial Council by the date of entry into force of this Act shall serve for the remainder of the term of office thereof.
