We, the people of Cameroon,
Proud of our linguistic and cultural diversity, an enriching feature of our national identity, but profoundly aware of the imperative need to further consolidate our unity, solemnly declare that we constitute one and the same Nation, bound by the same destiny, and assert our firm determination to build the Cameroonian Fatherland on the basis of the ideals of fraternity, justice and progress;
Jealous of our hard-won independence and resolved to preserve same; convinced that the salvation of Africa lies in forging ever-growing bonds of solidarity among African Peoples, affirm our desire to contribute to the advent of a united and free Africa, while maintaining peaceful and brotherly relations with the other nations of the World, in accordance with the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations;
Resolved to harness our natural resources in order to ensure the well-being of every citizen without discrimination, by raising living standards, proclaim our right to development as well as our determination to devote all our efforts to that end and declare our readiness to cooperate with all States desirous of participating in this national endeavour with due respect for our sovereignty and the independence of the Cameroonian State.
We, the people of Cameroon,
Declare that the human person, without distinction as to race, religion, sex or belief, possesses inalienable and sacred rights;
Affirm our attachment to the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Charter of United Nations and the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and all duly ratified international conventions relating thereto, in particular, to the following principles:
The coat of arms of the Republic of Cameroon shall be an escutcheon surmounted chief by the legend "Republic of Cameroon" and supported by two crossed fasces with the motto "Peace - Work - Fatherland" base.
The escutcheon shall be composed of a star on a field vent and triangle gules, charged with the geographical outline of Cameroon azure, and surcharged the sword and scales of justice sable.
Political parties and groups shall help the electorate in the making of voting decisions. They shall be bound to respect the principles of democracy, national sovereignty and unity. They shall be formed and shall exercise their activities in accordance with the law.
State power shall be exercised by:
Parliament.
He shall be sworn in by the President of the National Assembly.
He shall define their duties. He shall terminate their appointment. He shall preside over the Council of Ministers.
The Government shall implement the policy of the Nation as defined by the President of the Republic.
It shall be responsible to the National Assembly under the conditions and procedures provided for in Article 34 below.
The office of member of Government and any office ranking as such shall be incompatible with that of member of Parliament, Chairman of the Executive or Assembly of a local or regional authority, leader of a national professional association, or with any other employment or professional activity.
However, the Houses shall be convened simultaneously only if the business of the day concerns both of them.
receive the oath of members of the Constitutional Council;
take a decision on a draft or proposed constitutional amendment. When Parliament meets in congress, the Bureau of the National Assembly shall preside over the proceedings.
The number of members of the National Assembly may be modified by law.
The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted.
Where a private members' bill has not been considered during two successive ordinary sessions, it shall automatically be considered at the very next ordinary session.
The extraordinary session shall wind up as soon as the agenda for which it was convened is exhausted.
Where a private members' bill has not been considered during two successive ordinary sessions, it shall automatically be considered at the very next ordinary session.
In such case, bills shall be passed by an absolute majority of the Senators.
Bills may be tabled either by the President of the Republic or by members of Parliament.
Matters not reserved to the legislative power shall come under the jurisdiction of the authority empowered to issue rules and regulations.
In which case, the President of the Senate shall return the adopted bill to the President of the National Assembly who shall forward same within 48 (forty-eight) hours to the President of the Republic for enactment.
Such amendment must be approved by a simple majority of the Senators.
In which case, the amended bill shall be returned to the National Assembly by the President of the Senate for reconsideration.
The amendment proposed by the Senate shall be passed or rejected by a simple majority of the members of the National Assembly.
The final bill adopted shall be forwarded by the President of the National Assembly to the President of the Republic for enactment.
Such rejection must be approved by an absolute majority of the senators. In which case, the rejected bill with reasons therefore shall be returned to the National Assembly by the President of the Senate for reconsideration.
The final bill adopted by the National Assembly shall be forwarded to the President of the Republic for enactment.
The text prepared for the joint Commission shall be submitted to both Houses by the President of the Republic for approval.
No amendment shall be admissible, except with the approval of the President of Republic.
Where the joint commission fails to agree on a common text, or where such text is not adopted by both Houses, the President of the Republic may:
declare the government bill or private members' bill null and void.
The President of the Republic may, at his request, address the National Assembly, the Senate or the two Houses meeting in congress. He may also send messages to them; but no such address or message may be debated in his presence.
The Prime Minister and the other members of Government shall have access to Parliament and may participate in its deliberations.
Voting shall take place not less than 48 (forty-eight) hours after the vote of no confidence has been requested.
A vote of no confidence shall be passed by an absolute majority of the members of the National Assembly.
Only votes against a vote of confidence shall be counted.
Where a motion of censure is rejected, its signatories may not propose a new motion before a period of one year except as provided for in paragraph (4) below.
This shall apply in particular to:
He shall be assisted in this task by the Higher Judicial Council which shall give him its opinion on all nominations for the bench and on disciplinary action against judicial and legal officers. The organization and functioning of the Higher Judicial Council shall be defined by law.
an administrative bench;
an audit bench.
The judicial bench shall give final rulings on:
judgments passed by the lower courts of the judicial system that have become final in cases where the application of the law is challenged;
all matters expressly devolving upon it by law.
The administrative bench shall examine all the administrative disputes involving the State and other public authorities. It shall:
give final rulings on appeals against final judgments passed by lower courts in cases of administrative disputes;
examine any other disputes expressly devolving upon it by law.
The audit bench shall be competent to control and rule on public accounts, as well as on those of public and semi-public enterprises. It shall:
examine any other matters expressly devolving upon it by law.
The President of the Republic shall negotiate and ratify treaties and international agreements. Treaties and international agreements falling within the area of competence of the legislative power as defined in Article 26 above shall be submitted to Parliament for authorization to ratify.
Where the Constitutional Council finds a provision of a treaty or of an international agreement unconstitutional, authorization to ratify and the ratification of the said treaty or agreement shall be deferred until the Constitution is amended.
Duly approved or ratified treaties and international agreements shall, following the publication, override national laws, provided the other party implements the said treaty or agreement.
The Constitutional Council shall have jurisdiction in matters pertaining to the Constitution. It shall rule on the constitutionality of laws. It shall be the organ regulating the functioning of the institutions.
the constitutionality of the standing orders of the National Assembly and the Senate prior to their implementation;
conflict of powers between State institutions; between the State and the Regions, and between the Regions.
Presidents of regional executives may refer matters to the Constitutional Council whenever the interests of their Regions are at stake.
Enactment deadlines shall cease to lapse once an instrument has been referred to the Constitutional Council.
In any case, the Constitutional Council shall give a ruling within a period of 15 (fifteen) days, once a matter has been referred to it.
However, at the request of the President of the Republic, such time-limit may be reduced to 8 (eight) days.
These members shall be chosen from among personalities of established professional renown.
They must be of high moral integrity and proven competence.
They shall be designated as follows:
three by the President of the National Assembly after consultation with the Bureau;
three by the President of the Senate after consultation with the Bureau;
two by the Higher Judicial Council. Besides the eleven members provided for above, former presidents of the Republic shall be ex officio members of the Constitutional Council for life. In case of a tie, the President of the Constitutional Council shall have the casting vote.
A law shall lay down the organization and functioning of the Constitutional Council, the conditions for referring matters to its as well as the procedure applicable before it.
the Prime Minister, members of Government and persons ranking as such and senior government officials to whom powers have been delegated in pursuance of Articles 10 and 12 above, for conspiracy against the security of the State.
There shall be an Economic and Social Council whose composition, duties and organization shall be laid down by law.
Any other such authority shall be created by law.
The duty of the councils of regional and local authorities shall be to promote the economic, social, health, educational, cultural and sports development of the said authorities.
the resources of the Regions.
the land and property rights of each Region.
The Regional Council and the President of the Regional Council shall function within the framework of powers transferred to the Region by the State.
representatives of traditional rulers elected by their peers.
The Regional Councils shall reflect the various sociological components of the Region.
The system of election, number, proportion by category, rules governing ineligibility, incompatibilities and emoluments of Regional Councillors shall be laid down by law.
The President of the Regional Council shall be the executive organ of the Region. In this capacity, he shall be the interlocutor of the State representative. He shall be assisted by a Regional Bureau elected at the same time as himself from among the members of the Council. The Regional Bureau shall reflect the sociological components of the Region.
undermines the security of the State or public law and order;
endangers the State's territorial integrity.
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by law.
The other cases of dissolution shall be laid down by law.
undermine the security of the State or public law and order;
endanger the State's territorial integrity.
The other cases of suspension shall be laid down by law.
The other cases of dismissal shall be laid down by law.
Centre;
East;
Far North;
Littoral;
North;
North West;
West;
South;
South West.
No procedure for the amendment of the Constitution affecting the republican form, unity and territorial integrity of the State and the democratic principles which govern the Republic shall be accepted.
The Preamble shall be part and parcel of this Constitution.
The President of the Republic, the Prime Minister, Members of Government and persons ranking as such, the President and Members of the Bureau of the National Assembly, the President and Members of the Bureau of the Senate, Members of Parliament, Senators, all holders of an effective elective office, Secretaries-General of Ministries and person ranking as such, Directors of the Central Administration, General Managers of public and semi-public enterprises, Judicial and Legal Officers, administrative personnel in charge of the tax base, collection and handling of public funds, all managers of public votes and property, shall declare their assets and property at the beginning and at the end of their tenure of office.
The other categories of persons to whom the provisions of this article shall apply and the conditions of implementation thereof shall be determined by law.
The legislation applicable in the Federal State of Cameroon and in the Federated States on the date of entry into force of this Constitution shall remain in force insofar as it is not repugnant to this Constitution, and as long as it is not amended by subsequent laws and regulations.
This law shall be registered and published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Cameroon in English and French and implemented as the Constitution of the Republic of Cameroon.
