The Proclamation of National Independence is one of the supreme moments in the History of the Cape Verdian nation, resulting in the revitalization of our people, who have undergone the same vicissitudes of fate but who share the persistent hope of creating in these islands proper living conditions for all of our children. Independence has also allowed Cape Verde to become a full member of the international community.
However, the affirmation of an independent state was not accompanied by the establishment of a regime characterized by pluralistic democracy, but rather the organization of political power was subject to the philosophy and principles of a single party.
The exercise of power in this framework has demonstrated, on a universal scale, the necessity of introducing profound changes in the organization of the political and social life of these States. New ideas assail the world, destroying structures and concepts which seemed solidly established, completely changing the course of international political events.
In Cape Verde, political opening was announced in 1990, with the creation of the institutional conditions required for the first presidential and legislative elections within the framework of political competition.
Thus, on September 28, the National Popular Assembly approved Constitutional Law No. 2/III/90, which, in revoking Article 4 of the Constitution and establishing the principle of pluralism, created a new type of political regime.
Conceived as a means to revitalize democratic elections and a transition towards a new model for the organization of the political and social life of the country, it also established a different system of government and another form of suffrage, in view of imminent elections for a new legislative assembly.
It was in this context that the first legislative elections took place in January 1991, followed by Presidential elections in February. The participation of the population in these elections demonstrated clearly the country's option in the direction of change of political regime.
However, the historical context in which, by means of a partial revision of the Constitution, parties were recognized as the principal instruments for the formation of political will in government, has led to a pluralistic democracy which continues to function under the rules and principles of the previous regime.
Nevertheless, the political and social reality was that the country was in a process of rapid and profound transformation, with the population and emerging political forces assuming the values which characterize a Democratic State, values not yet mirrored in the Constitution.
This Constitutional Law intends, then, to provide the country with a useful framework, in its text and in its new model. The option in favor of a Constitution with the basic principles of a pluralistic democracy, abandoning other governmental options, will provide stability to a country weak in resources, and political succession without upheaval.
Assuming the principle of popular sovereignty, this Constitutional text consecrates a Democratic State with a vast list of rights, liberties, and guarantees to citizens, the concept of the dignity of the human being as the absolute value which is supreme over the State itself, a system of government with a balance of power between the various national institutions, a strong and independent judiciary, local authorities whose officeholders shall be elected by the communities to whom they are responsible, a Public Administration at the service of the citizens and conceived as an instrument of development, and a system of defense of the Constitution characteristic of a pluralistic democracy.
Therefore, this Constitutional Law incorporates the profound political changes at work in the country and fosters institutional conditions for the exercise of power and of citizenship in a climate of liberty, peace, and justice, the basis of all economic, social and cultural development in Cape Verde.
The following are the fundamental duties of the State:
The upper and lower bands shall be blue, the upper one being half the size of the flag and the lower band, one-fourth.
Separating the two blue bands shall be three bands, each equaling one-twelfth of the surface of the flag.
The two bands adjacent to the blue bands shall be white, and the band between those shall be red.
On the five bands there will be ten yellow five-pointed stars, with a top apex at ninety degrees, forming a circle whose center will be at the intersection of the second vertical fourth from the left with the second horizontal fourth from the bottom. The star closest to the bottom is on a circle whose center shall be in the middle of the lower blue band.
The Capital of the Republic of Cape Verde shall be the city of Praia, on the island of Santiago.
Agreements in simplified form, not requiring ratification, may be approved by the Governmental agency most competent to have jurisdiction over the subject-matter of the agreement.
Constitutional norms regarding rights, liberties, and guarantees shall bind all public and private entities and shall be directly enforced.
All citizens shall have the right to disobey any order which offends their rights, liberties, and guarantees, and to repel by force any illegal aggression when it is not possible to have recourse to public authority.
All citizens shall have equal social status and shall be equal before the law, without privilege, benefit, or prejudice, and may not be deprived of any rights or exempt from any duty by reason of race, sex, ancestry, language, origin, religion, social and economic condition, or political or ideological conviction.
The principles enunciated in this title shall apply to individual rights, liberties, and guarantees which are analogous to those established in the Constitution or consecrated by law or international convention.
Rights, liberties, and guarantees may only be suspended in the event of a declaration of martial law or a state of emergency, under conditions provided for in the Constitution.
In no case shall imprisonment or security measures be perpetual or of unlimited or indefinite duration.
No penalty or security measure may lead to loss of civic, political, or professional rights nor deprivation of fundamental rights, except within the limits inherent in the sentence and the specific requirements of its execution.
No native-born Cape Verdian may be deprived of nationality or the prerogatives of citizenship.
Privacy of correspondence and telecommunication shall be guaranteed except in cases in which, by judicial decision rendered in accordance with the law in a criminal trial, interference with correspondence and telecommunication shall be permitted to public authorities.
The creation of political parties, as well as their merger, coalition, and disbanding, shall be free, as provided in the Constitution and in law.
All citizens shall have the rights, individually or collectively, to present to public authorities written petitions, complaints or grievances in defense of their rights or in protest of illegal abuses of power, as provided by law.
The State shall set national standards regarding limiting the duration of work and shall create conditions for establishing a national minimum wage for various occupations.
No one may be forced to join a union or professional association, or to remain in a union or professional association, or to pay dues to a union or professional association of which they are not a member.
Everyone shall have the right to proper housing; the State shall have the duty to achieve this by gradually promoting, according to national economic development, adequate institutional, regulatory, and infrastructural conditions to encourage and support initiatives of local communities to stimulate private construction and access to proper housing.
The State shall encourage and support the creation of consumers' associations; the law has the duty to protect consumers and guarantee the defense of their interests.
All individuals shall have the duty to respect their fellow-citizens without discrimination of any type and to maintain relations which promote, safeguard, and reinforce mutual respect and tolerance.
All individuals shall have the duty:
The State shall encourage and support foreign investment which contributes to the economic and social development of the country.
The financial system shall guarantee the formation and protection of savings, as well as the application of financial measures necessary for the economic and social development of the country.
Tax laws may not be applied retroactively unless retroactivity would be more favorable to the taxpayer.
Execution of the State Budget shall be supervised by the Court of Accounts and by the National Assembly, which shall audit and approve the State's General Accounting.
Courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction in judging the regularity and validity of the electoral process.
During the period from one year before the election to any political office until the verification of the results, the respective electoral law may not be altered or revoked.
The voting process and verification of the votes shall be supervised by candidates, political parties, and competing political forces through delegates appointed by them for each election.
Voters residing abroad shall be integrated into electoral colleges corresponding to the electoral districts where they are registered.
In the exercise of political power, the people shall designate office holders by universal, direct, secret, periodic suffrage.
Parties, coalitions, and groups of citizens, as well as the candidates proposed by them, shall have the right to equal treatment by public entities to have the best conditions for an election campaign.
On each list the candidates shall be ranked in the order of precedence indicated on the respective declaration of candidacy, and seats shall be attributed by that order of precedence.
Cape Verdian voters shall be eligible except for ineligibilities provided by law.
Political parties may only be barred by judicial decision and in cases established by law.
The law shall regulate the benefits attributed to political parties by the State and shall establish rules and constitutional precepts relative to political parties.
The following are national bodies:
Office holders in national elective bodies, local offices, and other elected political bodies may not be designated for life.
"I swear on my honor to faithfully fulfill the office of President of the Republic of Cape Verde in which I am installed, to defend, fulfill, and enforce the Constitution, to observe the laws, and to guarantee territorial integrity and national independence."
The President of the Republic may not exercise any other political function or public office, except in cases specifically provided in the Constitution, and in no case may he occupy any private post.
The President of the Republic may in no case be subjected to preventive detention.
In the area of international relations, the President of the Republic shall have the following responsibilities:
The National Assembly shall be the assembly representing all Cape Verdian citizens.
Except in the event of dissolution, the election for the National Assembly must take place during the period which begins four years and eleven months after the date of the previous election and ends five years and fifteen days after that date.
At the end of the legislature or in the event of dissolution, the Executive Board of the National Assembly shall remain in office until the opening of the constituent session of the newly-elected Assembly.
The number of ordinary legislative sessions shall be set by the National Assembly's bylaws but shall never be fewer than two per year.
The National Assembly shall meet to begin the legislative session on the twentieth day following the publication of the election results in the Official Journal of the Republic.
Deputies shall be representatives of all the people and not only of the electoral districts from which they were elected.
Deputies may do the following:
Deputies shall have the duty to:
The National Assembly shall have the following authority:
The President of the National Assembly shall have the following authorities:
The Commissions and Parliamentary Groups shall have the authority established by the Constitution and the by-laws of the National Assembly.
The National Assembly shall have the authority:
Except for legislative authority granted to the Government, the National Assembly shall have exclusive authority to make laws on the following subjects:
The National Assembly shall have the authority:
The National Assembly shall have the authority to approve:
The National Assembly shall have the authority, along with other bodies:
The Government shall be the body which defines, directs, and executes the general internal and external policy of the nation and shall be the supreme body of Public Administration.
The Government shall be politically responsible to the National Assembly.
The number, title, structure, and duties of the Ministers and Secretaries of State, and the process of coordination among them, shall be established by Decree.
The Government shall begin its functions with the inauguration of the Prime Minister and other Ministers and shall cease with the resignation, dismissal, death, or permanent physical or mental disability of the Prime Minister.
Members of the Government shall be bound by the Government's program and the deliberations of the Council of Ministers, and shall be politically, collectively responsible for its execution.
Within two weeks from the date he takes office, the Prime Minister shall submit the Government's Program for deliberation by the National Assembly and must seek a motion of confidence limited to the subject of the general policy which he seeks to accomplish.
The Government, in the Council of Ministers, shall be responsible for the exercise of the following political functions:
The Government shall have the responsibility, through the Council of Ministers or any of its members, to exercise the following administrative functions:
The Government, in the Council of Ministers, shall have the following responsibilities in international relations:
The Prime Minister shall have the following responsibilities:
Courts may not apply norms contrary to the Constitution and the principles in it.
Court sessions shall be public unless the Court decides otherwise under provisions of the law with a view to safeguarding the dignity and privacy of persons or of its own functioning.
"I swear on my honor that I will execute the Constitution of the Republic of Cape Verde, that I will insure the constitutionality of laws and faithfully carry out the duties entrusted to me."
The Supreme Court of Justice in plenary session shall have the following responsibilities:
The Supreme Court of Justice shall also have the following responsibilities:
The statute of judges may provide for transfers between careers in the Judicial Magistrature and the Public Prosecutor's Office.
The statute of the Public Prosecutor's Office may establish transferability between careers in the Public Prosecutor's Office and the Judiciary.
Autonomous local government units shall be municipalities, with other categories permitted by law which are greater or lesser than municipalities in area.
Local governmental entities shall have their own regulatory power within the limits of the Constitution and the law.
To achieve common interests, local governmental entities may constitute associations and federations.
The law shall regulate the civil, criminal, and disciplinary responsibility of public officials and other agents of the State or other public entities for acts or omissions committed in the exercise of their duties, and the provisions under which the State and other public entities shall have the right to recall office holders, public officials, and agents.
National defense shall be at the disposition, integration, and coordinated action of all the moral and material energy and force of the Nation, opposing any form of threat or aggression, with the goal of permanently guaranteeing the unity, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and independence of Cape Verde, the liberty and security of its population, as well as the democratically established constitutional order.
The law may establish restrictions in the exercise of rights of expression, assembly, demonstration, association, and petition, as well as those in respect to civilian employees in the Armed Forces and the electoral status of military personnel in both active and other service, within the strict limits of the demands of military status.
No one may be jeopardized in his employment, placement, promotion, or benefits because of military or compulsory civic service.
Deliberations of the Council of the Republic shall not be binding.
Laws of the President of the Republic shall take the form of presidential decrees; under the provisions of the Constitution, they may not take any other form.
No law may create other categories of legislative acts or attribute power to interpret or integrate laws, or to modify, suspend or revoke any legislative act.
Laws which regulate the functioning of the Council of the Republic, the Council for Regional Affairs, and the Municipal Assemblies shall take the form of by-laws.
Acts of the National Assembly provided for in Article 191 (3) (a) and (b) shall take the form of motions.
Laws and decree-laws shall have equal weight, without jeopardizing the greater weight of organic and basic laws and the subordination of legislative decrees and those that develop the general bases of the judicial regime.
Martial law may only be declared, in all or part of the national territory, in the event of imminent or effective aggression on the national territory by foreign forces or grave threat or disturbance to the constitutional order.
A state of emergency shall be declared, in all or part of the national territory, in the event of public calamity or disturbance to the constitutional order, the gravity of which does not justify martial law.
A declaration of martial law or a state of emergency shall, in no case, affect rights to life, physical integrity, personal identity, civil status, and citizenship, the non-retroactivity of criminal law, the right of the accused to defense, freedom of conscience and religion.
A declaration of martial law or a state of emergency shall not affect constitutional rules regarding the responsibility and functioning of national bodies, nor the rights and immunities of the respective officials; nor may it alter the principles of responsibility of the State or its agents recognized in the Constitution.
The Supreme Court of Justice, at the request of the President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, the Attorney General of the Republic, and not less than one-fourth of the Deputies in the National Assembly, may review and rule upon:
The President of the Republic may not refuse to promulgate laws of revision.
In wartime and during martial law or a state of emergency, no law revising the Constitution may be passed.
The President of the Republic, the Deputies in the National Popular Assembly, and local officeholders shall remain in office until the end of their respective terms, whose duration shall be that established by the Constitution or the law in force on the date of their respective elections.
Rights which precede the Constitution shall continue, provided they are not contrary to the Constitution and the principles established in it.
The National Assembly, within ninety days from the date on which the Constitution takes effect, shall meet to elect one judge of the Supreme Court of Justice, two members of the Council of the Republic, and three members of the Superior Council of Magistrates.
Judges shall elect two of their peers to the Superior Council of Magistrates within ninety days from the date on which the Constitution takes effect.
The Superior Council of Magistrates shall meet within 120 days from the date on which the Constitution takes effect to designate not fewer than three judges to the Supreme Court of Justice.
