We, the citizens of the Czech Republic in Bohemia, in Moravia, and in Silesia,
At the time of the restoration of an independent Czech state,
Resolved to build, safeguard, and develop the Czech Republic in the spirit of the sanctity of human dignity and liberty,
As the homeland of free citizens enjoying equal rights, conscious of their duties towards others and their responsibility towards the community,
As a free and democratic state founded on respect for human rights and on the principles of civic society,
As part of the family of democracies in Europe and around the world,
Resolved to guard and develop together the natural and cultural, material and spiritual wealth handed down to us,
Resolved to abide by all proven principles of a state governed by the rule of law,
Through our freely-elected representatives, do adopt this Constitution of the Czech Republic.
The Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms forms part of the constitutional order of the Czech Republic.
The fundamental rights and basic freedoms shall enjoy the protection of judicial bodies.
The political system is founded on the free and voluntary formation of and free competition among those political parties which respect the fundamental democratic principles and which renounce force as a means of promoting their interests.
Political decisions emerge from the will of the majority manifested in free voting. The decision-making of the majority shall take into consideration the interests of minorities.
The state shall concern itself with the prudent use of its natural resources and the protection of its natural wealth.
The right of autonomous territorial units to self-government is guaranteed.
Promulgated treaties, to the ratification of which Parliament has given its consent and by which the Czech Republic is bound, form a part of the legal order; if a treaty provides something other than that which a statute provides, the treaty shall apply.
The territory of the Czech Republic forms an indivisible whole, the borders of which may be altered only by constitutional act.
The capital city of the Czech Republic is Prague.
Further conditions upon the exercise of the right to vote, the organization of elections, and the extent of judicial oversight over them shall be provided for by statute.
No person may be at the same time a member of both chambers of Parliament.
Deputies and Senators may resign their seat by a declaration made in person at a meeting of the chamber of which they are member. Should serious circumstances prevent them from so doing, they shall submit their resignation in the manner provided for by statute.
A Deputy or Senator’s mandate shall lapse:
Deputies and Senators shall perform their duties personally in accordance with their oath of office; in addition, they shall not be bound by anyone’s instructions.
Deputies and Senators have the right to refuse to give evidence as to facts about which they learned in connection with the performance of their duties, and this privilege continues in effect even after they cease to be a Deputy or Senator.
A Deputy or a Senator who is member of the government may not serve as the Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson of the Assembly of Deputies or the Senate or as a member of a parliamentary committee, investigating commission, or commission.
Sessions of the chambers shall be open to the public. The public may be excluded only under conditions provided for in a statute.
In order to adopt an electoral law, a law concerning the principles of dealings and relations of both chambers, both between themselves and externally, or a law enacting the standing orders for the Senate, both the Assembly of Deputies and the Senate must approve it.
The Assembly of Deputies shall submit bills which it has approved to the Senate without undue delay.
If the Senate declares its intent not to deal with a bill, it shall be adopted by that declaration.
The assent of both chambers of Parliament is required for the ratification of treaties:
Statutes that have been adopted shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Assembly of Deputies, the President of the Republic, and the Prime Minister.
The President of the Republic assumes her office upon taking the oath of office. The President of the Republic’s term of office lasts for five years and begins on the day she takes the oath of office.
Further conditions of the exercise of the right to vote in the election of the President as well as the details of the process of proposing the presidential candidates for the office of the President of the Republic, the announcement and implementation of the election, and the announcement of the outcome of the election, and the judicial review shall be provided in a statute.
If the President-elect refuses to take the oath of office or takes it with reservations, he shall be deemed not to have been elected.
The President of the Republic may resign her office by submitting her resignation to the Chairperson of the Senate.
The President of the Republic:
If the office of the Presidency becomes vacant and before a new President of the Republic has been elected or has taken the oath of office, likewise if the President of the Republic is, for serious reasons, incapable of performing his duties, and if the Assembly of Deputies and the Senate adopt a resolution to this effect, the performance of the presidential duties under Article 63 paragraph 1, letters a) to e) and h) to k), and Article 63, paragraph 2 shall devolve upon the Prime Minister. In any period in which the Prime Minister is performing the above-specified presidential duties, the performance of the duties under Article 62 letters a) to e) and k) and further Article 63 paragraph 1 letter f), if the announcement of the election for the Senate is concerned shall devolve upon the Chairperson of the Assembly of Deputies; if the office of the Presidency becomes vacant during a period in which the Assembly of Deputies is dissolved, the performance of these functions shall devolve upon the Chairperson of the Senate, who is also in charge of the office of the Presidency at the time when the Prime Minister is in charge of the designated functions of the President of the Republic pursuant to Article 63 paragraph 1 letter f), if the announcement of the election for the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament is concerned.
Members of the government may not engage in activities which are by their nature incompatible with the performance of minister’s duties. Detailed provisions shall be set down in a statute.
The government may submit to the Assembly of Deputies a request for vote of confidence.
The President of the Republic shall recall members of the government if the Prime Minister so proposes.
The President of the Republic shall recall a government that has not submitted its resignation, even though it was obliged to do so.
In order to implement statutes, and while remaining within the bounds thereof, the government is authorized to issue orders. Such orders shall be signed by the Prime Minister and the competent member of the government.
The judicial power shall be exercised in the name of the Republic by independent courts.
The Constitutional Court is the judicial body responsible for the protection of constitutionality.
Courts are called upon above all to provide protection of rights in the legally prescribed manner. Only a court may decide upon guilt and determine the punishment for criminal offense.
The Supreme Court is the highest judicial body in matters that fall within the jurisdiction of courts, with the exception of matters that come under the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court or the Supreme Administrative Court.
The Czech Republic is subdivided into municipalities, which are the basic territorial self-governing units, and into regions, which are the higher territorial self-governing units.
[Repealed]
The exercise of state administration may be delegated to self-governing bodies only if such is provided for by statute.
The government of the Czech Republic, appointed after the elections in 1992 and performing its duties on the day this Constitution enters into force, is deemed to be a government appointed pursuant to this Constitution.
Until such time as the State Attorney’s Office is established, its duties shall be performed by the Office of the Procuracy of the Czech Republic.
Until the thirty-first of December 1993, military courts shall also form a system of courts.
Judges of all courts of the Czech Republic holding office on the day this Constitution enters into force are deemed to be judges appointed pursuant to the Constitution of the Czech Republic.
This Constitution shall enter into force on the first of January 1993.
Parliament has enacted this Constitutional Act of the Czech Republic:
The following higher territorial self-governing units shall be created in the Czech Republic:
[Translator’s note: the names, capitols, and territorial delimitation of the 14 higher territorial self-governing units have been omitted from this translation.]
The borders of the higher territorial self-governing units may be changed only by statute.
The Constitutional Act of the Czech National Council, No. 1/1993 Sb., the Constitution of the Czech Republic, is amended as follows:
This Constitutional Act comes into effect on 1 January 2000.
Parliament has enacted this Constitutional Act of the Czech Republic:
It is the State’s basic duty to ensure the Czech Republic’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, the protection of its democratic foundations, and the protection of lives, health and property.
If during a period of a state of emergency, a condition of threat to the State, or a state of war, the conditions in the Czech Republic do not permit the holding of elections by the deadline prescribed for regular electoral terms, the deadline may be extended by statute, however for no longer than six months.
During a period when the Assembly of Deputies is dissolved, the Senate shall be competent:
A decision to declare state of emergency, a condition of threat to the State, or a state of war shall be made public by means of the mass media and shall be promulgated just like a statute. It enters into effect at the moment provided for in the decision.
This Constitutional Act comes into effect on the day of its promulgation.
Parliament has enacted this Constitutional Act of the Czech Republic:
Should the referendum take place in the final six months of the electoral term of the of the Assembly of Deputies or of the term of office of the representative bodies of territorial self- governing units, the President of the Republic shall call it so that it shall be held together with the elections to the Assembly of Deputies or to the representative bodies of territorial self-governing units.
The President of the Republic shall call the referendum within 30 days of the day on which the Treaty of Accession of the Czech Republic to the European Union is signed so that it can take place in the period beginning on the thirtieth day following the calling of the referendum and ending on the sixtieth day following.
If the conditions for the calling of referendum are met, the President of the Republic shall call it within 30 days of the day the petition proposing it be called is submitted, so that it may take place at the latest by the 90th day following the submission of that petition, otherwise she shall make the decision within the same period declining to call a referendum.
Further conditions on the exercise of the right to vote in the referendum, as well as the detailed provisions concerning the proposal, voting, the holding of the referendum, and the announcement of its results shall be regulated in a statute. In order for that statute to be adopted, both the Assembly of Deputies and the Senate must approve it.
Constitutional Act No. 1/1993 Sb., the Constitution of the Czech Republic, as amended by Constitutional Act No. 347/1997 Sb., Constitutional Act No. 300/2000 Sb., Constitutional Act No. 395/2001 Sb., and Constitutional Act No. 448/2001 Sb., shall be amended as follows:
[See the Constitution of the Czech Republic where these amendments are incorporated.]
This Constitutional Act shall enter into effect on 1 March 2003.
The Federal Assembly,
on the basis of the proposals of the Czech National Council and the Slovak National Council, Recognizing the inviolability of the natural rights of man, the rights of citizens, and the sovereignty of the law, Proceeding from the universally-shared values of humanity and from our nations' traditions of democracy and self-government,
Mindful of the bitter experience of periods when human rights and fundamental freedoms were suppressed in our homeland, Placing hope in the common endeavors of all free nations to safeguard these rights, Ensuing from the Czech and Slovak nations' right to self-determination, Recalling its share of responsibility towards future generations for the fate of all life on Earth, and Expressing the resolve that the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic should join in dignity the ranks of countries cherishing these values,
Has enacted this Charter of Fundamental Rights and Basic Freedoms:
All people are free, have equal dignity, and enjoy equality of rights. Their fundamental rights and basic freedoms are inherent, inalienable, non-prescriptible, and not subject to repeal.
Everyone has the capacity to possess rights.
No one may violate the confidentiality of letters or other papers or records, whether privately kept or sent by post or by some other means, except in the cases and in the manner designated by law. The confidentiality of communications sent by telephone, telegraph, or by other similar devices is guaranteed in the same way.
Any statutory provisions relating to political rights and freedoms, as well as the interpretation and application of them, shall make possible and protect the free competition among political forces in a democratic society.
Citizens have the right to put up resistance to any person who would do away with the democratic order of human rights and fundamental freedoms, established by this Charter, if the actions of constitutional institutions or the effective use of legal means have been frustrated.
A person's affiliation with any national or ethnic minority group may not be to her detriment.
Employees have the right to fair remuneration for their work and to satisfactory work conditions. Detailed provisions shall be set by law.
Everyone has the right to the protection of his health. Citizens shall have the right, on the basis of public insurance, to free medical care and to medical aids under conditions provided for by law.
Only a law may designate the acts which constitute a crime and the penalties or other detriments to rights or property that may be imposed for committing them.
The Czech and Slovak Federal Republic shall grant asylum to aliens who are being persecuted for the assertion of their political rights and freedoms. Asylum may be denied to a person who has acted contrary to fundamental human rights and basic freedoms.
Restrictions may be placed upon the exercise of the right to engage in business enterprises and other economic activities, as well as of the right enumerated in Article 20 para. 2, by judges and prosecutors; by employees in state administration and in local self-government, holding the positions specified therein as well as upon their exercise of the right enumerated in Article 27 para. 4; by members of security corps and members of the armed forces, as well as, insofar as such is related to the performance of their duties, upon their exercise of the rights listed in Articles 18, 19, and 27 paras. 1 to 3. A law may place restrictions upon the exercise of the right to strike by persons who engage in professions essential for the protection of human life and health.
