We, representative of the Dominican people, freely and democratically elected, assembled in the National Revisory Assembly, invoking the name of God, guided by the ideology of our Founding Fathers, Juan Pablo Duarte, Matías Ramón Mella and Francisco del Rosario Sánchez, and the heroes of the Restoration of establishing a free, independent, sovereign and democratic Republic, inspired by the examples of the struggles and sacrifices of our immortal heroes and heroines, propelled by the selfless work of our men and women, ruled by the supreme values and the fundamental principles of human dignity, liberty, equality, the rule of law, justice, solidarity, and fraternal coexistence, social well-being, ecological equilibrium, progress and peace, essential factors for social cohesion, we declare our desire to promote the unity of the Dominican Nation, for which in an exercise of our free determination we adopt and proclaim the following
The Dominican people constitute a Nation organized as a free and independent State, named the Dominican Republic.
Sovereignty resides exclusively with the people, from whom flow all of the powers, which they exercise through their representatives or directly in the terms established by this Constitution and the law.
The sovereignty of the Dominican Nation, a State free and independent of all foreign power is inviolable. No public power organized by the present Constitution may realize or permit the occurrence of acts that constitute an intervention either direct or indirect in either internal or external matters of the Dominican Republic or an interference that threatens the personality and integrity of the State and the characteristics recognizes and enshrined in this Constitution. The principle of non-intervention constitutes an invariable norm of Dominican international policy.
The government of the Nation is essentially civilian, republican, democratic, and representative. It is divided in the Legislative Power, the Executive Power, and the Judicial Power. These three powers are independent in the exercise of their respective duties. Their officials are responsible and may not delegate their responsibilities, which are determined solely by this Constitution and the law.
The Constitution is based on the respect for human dignity and the indivisible unity of the Nation, common fatherland of all Dominican men and women.
All people and bodies that exercise public authority are subject to the Constitution, supreme law and basis of the legal system of the State. All laws, decrees, resolutions, regulations or acts contrary to this Constitution are null of plain right.
The Dominican Republic is a Social and Democratic State of Law, organized in the form of a single Republic, bases on the respect of human dignity, fundamental rights, work, popular sovereignty, and the separation and independence of the public powers.
The effective protection of the rights of the person, the respect of their dignity and the securing of means that allow for their perfection in an egalitarian, equitable and progressive way, within a framework of individual liberty and social justice, compatible with the public order, the general well-being and the rights of all is an essential function of the State.
The territory of the Dominican Republic is inalienable. It is composed of:
The public powers shall procure the preservation of the national rights and interests in airspace in the framework of international agreements, with the objective of securing and improving communication and the population’s access to the assets and services developed there.
Security, economic, social, and touristic development of the Borderland Zone, its transportation, communication, and productive integration, as well as the spread of national and cultural values of the Dominican people are declared to be of supreme and permanent national interest.
The sustainable use and the protection of borderlands rivers, the use of the international highway and the preservation of the borderland stations using geodesic points are ruled by the principles established in the Revision Protocol of the year 1936 from the Border Treaty of 1929 and the Treaty of Peace, Perpetual Friendship and Arbitrage of 1929 endorsed by the Republic of Haiti.
For the government and the administration of the State, the territory of the Republic is politically divided in a National District and the regions, provinces, and municipalities determined by law. The regions shall be composed of the provinces and municipalities established by law.
The city of Santo Domingo de Guzman is the National District, capital of the Republic and seat of the national government.
Nonrenewable natural resources that are found in the territory and in the marine areas under national jurisdiction, genetic resources, biodiversity, and the radio-electric spectrum are national patrimony.
Water constitutes an inalienable, imprescriptible strategic national patrimony for the use of the public that is not subject to seizure and is essential for life. Human consumption of water takes priority over any other use. The State shall promote the planning and implementation of effective policies for the protection of the water resources of the Nation.
The high watersheds of the rivers and the zones of endemic, native and migratory biodiversity, are subjects of special protection by the public powers in order to guarantee their management and preservation as fundamental assets of the Nation. The rivers, lakes lagoons, beaches and national coasts belong to the public domain and are freely accessible, always respecting the right to private property. The law shall regulate the conditions, forms and rights in which individuals shall access the enjoyment or management of these areas.
Wildlife, the conservation units that compose the National System of Protected Areas and the ecosystems and species that they contain constitute patrimonial assets of the Nation and are inalienable, imprescriptible, and not subject to seizure. The limits of the protected areas may only be reduced by law with the approval with two thirds of the votes of the members of the chambers of the National Congress.
Mining deposits of hydrocarbons and, in general, nonrenewable natural resources may only be explored and exploited by private citizens, under sustainable environmental guidelines, according to the concessions, contracts, licenses, permits or fees, in conditions determined by law. The private citizens my exploit renewable natural resources in a reasonable manner with the conditions, responsibilities and limitations dictated by law. Accordingly:
The following are Dominicans:
The public powers shall apply special policies to conserve and strengthen the ties of the Dominican Nation with its nationals abroad, with the essential goal of achieving greater integration.
Foreigners may become naturalized in accordance with the law, they may not vote for the presidency or vice-presidency of the powers of the State, nor are they obligated to take up arms against their State of origin. The law shall regulate other limitations on naturalized people.
The ability of Dominicans to acquire a foreign nationality is recognized. The acquisition of another nationality does not imply the loss of Dominican nationality.
Dominicans that adopt another nationality, by a voluntary act or by their place of birth, may aspire to the presidency or vice-presidency of the Republic if they renounce their acquired nationality ten year prior to the election and reside in the country during the ten years previous to the post. Nevertheless, they may occupy other elected or ministerial offices or of diplomatic representation of the country abroad and in international bodies, without renouncing the acquired nationality.
All Dominicans who are eighteen years of age and those who are or have been married, even though they have not reached this age, enjoy citizenship.
The following are rights of citizens:
The rights of citizenship are lost by irrevocable condemnation in cases of treason, espionage, conspiracy as well as for taking up arms and for aiding or participating in attempts of deliberate damages against the interests of the Republic.
The rights of citizenship are suspended in cases of:
Foreigners have the same rights and duties as nationals in the Dominican Republic, with the exceptions and limitations that this Constitution and the laws establish; consequently:
The Dominican Republic is a State member of the international community, open to cooperation and tied to the norms of international law, consequently:
The Dominican Republic shall have representatives before international parliaments with which it has signed agreements that recognize its participation and representation.
In order to be a representative before international parliaments one must be Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and responsibilities and have reached an age of 25.
The official language of the Dominican Republic is Spanish.
The national symbols are the National Flag, the National Coat of Arms, and the National Hymn.
The National Flag is composed of the colors ultramarine blue and vermillion red, in alternating quarters, located in such a way that the blue is in the upper part of the flagpole, separated by a white cross half the width of the height of a quarter and that carries in its center the National Coat of Arms. The merchant flag is the same as the national, but without the Coat of Arms.
The National Coat of Arms has the same colors as the National Flag used in the same way. It carries in its center the Bible open to the Gospel of Saint John, chapter 8, verse 32, and above the cross, which come from a trophy formed by two lances and four national flags without the coat of arms, facing both sides; it carries a branch of laurel on the left side and one of palm on the right side. It is crowned by an ultramarine blue ribbon which reads the motto “God, Country, and Liberty”. At the base there is another ribbon, this one vermillion red, its ends are oriented upwards with the words “Dominican Republic”. The form of the National Coat of Arms is of a rectangle, with the upper corners projecting and the lower ones rounded, the base at the center of which ends in a point and is oriented in a way in which a perfect square results from tracing a horizontal line that unites the two verticals of the rectangle from where the lower corners begin.
The National Hymn is the musical composition of José Reyes with the lyrics of Emilio Prud’Homme, and it is unique and invariable.
The National Motto is “God, Country, and Liberty”.
The 27th of February and 16th of August, anniversaries of the Independence and the Restoration of the Republic, respectively, are declared national holidays.
The law shall regulate the use of the national symbols and the dimensions of the National Flag and the National Coat of Arms.
The right to life is inviolable from conception until death. The death penalty may not be established, pronounced, nor applied in any case.
The State bases itself on respect for the dignity of the person and organizes itself for the real and effective protection of the fundamental rights that are inherent to it. The dignity of the human being is sacred, innate, and inviolable; its respect and protection constitute an essential responsibility of the public powers.
All people are born free and equal before the law, receive the same protection and treatment from institutions, authorities, and other people and enjoy the same rights liberties and opportunities, without any discrimination for reasons of gender, color, age, disability, nationality, family ties, language, religions, political or philosophical opinion, social or personal condition. Consequently:
All people have a right to liberty and personal security. Accordingly:
Slavery, serfdom, and the trade and traffic of persons are prohibited in all their forms.
All people have the right to have their physical, psychic, moral integrity and the right to live without violence respected. They shall have the protection of the state in cases of threat, risk, or violation of the same. Consequently:
All people have the right to the free development of their personality, without more limitations than those imposed by judicial order and the rights of others.
All people have the right to privacy. The respect and non-interference into private and family life, the home, and private correspondence are guaranteed. The right to honor, good name, and one’s own image are recognized. All authorities or individuals who violate them are obligated to compensate or repair them in accordance with the law. Thus:
The State guarantees the freedom of conscience and religion, subject to the public order and respect to good customs.
All persons that find themselves in the national territory have the right to travel, reside, and leave freely from the same, in accordance with legal dispositions.
All persons have the right to associate with legal purposes, in accordance with the law.
All persons have the right to meet, without prior permission, with lawful and peaceful purposes, in accordance with the law.
All persons have the right to freely express their thoughts, ideas, and opinions by any medium, without having allowed for prior censorship.
The enjoyment of these liberties shall be exercised respecting the right to honor and to privacy as well as the dignity and morale of people, especially the protection of youth and children, in accordance with the law and the public order.
The State recognizes and guarantees free enterprise, commerce, and industry. All persons have the right to freely dedicate themselves to the economic activity of their preference, without more limitations than those prescribed in this Constitution and those established by the law.
The State recognizes and guarantees the right of property. Property has a social function and implies obligations. All persons have the right to the full use, enjoyment, and disposal of their assets.
The right to the exclusive property of scientific, literary, and artistic works, inventions, and innovations, names, brands, distinctive marks, and other productions of the human intellect for the time are recognized and protected, in the form and with the limitations established by law.
All persons have the right to enjoy quality goods and services, and objective, true, and opportune information about the content and characteristics of the products and services that they use or consume, under the previsions and norms established by law.
The State shall promote research and the transference of technology for the production of foods and primary materials of agricultural origin, with the goal of increasing productivity and guaranteeing food security.
The family is the basis of society and the fundamental space for the integral development of people. It is formed by natural or legal ties, by the free decision of a man and a woman to enter into marriage or by the responsible willingness to conform to it.
The family, society, and State shall give preference to the superior interests of male and female children and adolescents, and shall have the obligation to assist and protect them in order to guarantee their harmonious and integral development and the full exercise of their fundamental rights, in accordance with this Constitution and the laws. Consequently:
The family, society, and the State shall come together for the protection and the assistance of elderly people and shall promote their integration into active community life. The State shall guarantee the services of integral social security and food subsidies in the case of poverty.
The State shall promote, protect, and ensure people with disabilities’ enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms, in conditions of equality as well as in the full and autonomous exercise of their abilities. The State shall adopt the positive means necessary to foster their family, community, social, labor, economic, cultural and political integration.
All persons have the right to dignified housing with basic essential services. The State should determine the necessary conditions to make effective this right and promote plans for housing and human settlements in the social interest. Legal access to titled real estate is a fundamental priority of public policy and the advancement of housing.
All persons have the right to social security. The State shall stimulate the progressive development of social security in order to ensure universal access to adequate protection in sickness, disability, unemployment, and old age.
All persons have the right to integral health. Consequently:
Work is a right, a duty, and a social function that is exercised with the protection and assistance of the State. It is an essential purpose of the State to foment dignified and paid employment. The public powers shall promote the dialogue and agreement between workers, employers, and the State. Consequently:
All persons have the right to an integral education that is of quality, permanent, equal in conditions and opportunities, and without more limitations than those derived from their aptitudes, vocation, and aspirations. Consequently:
All persons have the right to participate and act with freedom and without censure in the cultural life of the Nation, to full access and enjoyment of cultural assets and services, of scientific advances and literary and artistic production. The State shall protect the moral and material interests over the works of authors and inventors. Consequently:
All people have the right to physical education, sport, and recreation. It is the responsibility of the State, in collaboration with teaching centers and sports organizations to foment, incentivize, and support the practice and diffusion of these activities. Accordingly:
The State recognizes collective and diffuse rights and interests, which are exercised with conditions and limitations established by law. Consequently, it protects:
Preventing contamination, protecting and maintaining the environment for the enjoyment of present and future generations constitute duties of the State. Consequently:
The constitution guarantees the effectiveness of fundamental rights, through mechanisms of guardianship and protection, that offer to people the possibility of obtaining the fulfillment of their rights, when faced with those subjected, obligated, or owing to the same. Fundamental rights link all the public powers, which should guarantee their effectiveness in the terms established by the present Constitution and by the law.
All persons, in the exercise of their rights and legitimate interests, have the right to obtain effective judicial guardianship, with respect to the due process that shall be formed by the minimum guarantees that are established in the following:
All persons have the right to judicial action in order to gain knowledge of the existence of and to access the information about them which is held in registries or banks of public data and, in case of falseness or discrimination, to demand the suspension, rectification, update, and confidentiality of those, in accordance with the law. The secrecy of the sources of journalistic information may not be affected.
All persons deprived of their liberty or threatened with the same in an illegal, arbitrary or unreasonable manner have the right to an action of habeas corpus before a judge or competent tribunal, by themselves or by those who act in their name, in accordance with law, in order to gain knowledge of and to decide, in a simple, effective, quick, and summary way, the legality of the deprivation of or threat to their liberty.
All persons have the right to an action of amparo in order to demand before the courts, for themselves or by those who act in their name, immediate protection of their fundamental rights, not protected by habeas corpus, when they are violated or threatened by the action or omission of any public authority or of individuals, in order put into effect the fulfillment of a law or administrative act and in order to guarantee collective and diffuse rights and interests. In accordance with the law, the proceeding is preferential, summary, oral, public, free, and not subject to formalities.
The acts adopted during the States of Exception that violate protected rights that unreasonably cause suspended rights are subject to actions of amparo.
Acts that are issued from usurped authority, actions or decisions of public powers, institutions or persons that alter or subvert the constitutional order and any decision made by requisition of armed force are null of full right.
The interpretation and regulation of the fundamental rights and guarantees, recognized in the present Constitution, shall be ruled by the following principles:
The fundamental rights recognized in this Constitution determine the existence of an order of judicial and moral responsibility that rules the conduct of men and women in society. Consequently, the following are declared as fundamental duties of people:
The Legislative Power is exercised in the name of the people by the National Congress, formed by the Senate of the Republic and the Chamber of Deputies.
The election of senators and deputies shall be made by universal direct suffrage by the terms established by law.
The Senate is composed of elected members, one for each province and one for the National District, who shall exercise their role for four years.
In order to be a male or female senator one is required to be a male or female Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights, to have reached twenty-five years of age, to be a native of the territory that elects him or to have resided in it for at least five consecutive years. Consequently:
The exclusive powers of the Senate are:
The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed in the following manner:
In order to be a male or female deputy one must meet the same requirements as to be a senator.
The exclusive powers of the Chamber of Deputies are:
In each chamber the presence of more than half of the members is necessary for the validity of the deliberations. The decisions are adopted by the absolute majority of votes, except the issues previously declared to be urgent, which in their second discussion shall be decided by two thirds of those present.
The members of both chambers shall enjoy immunity for the opinions that they express in the sessions.
No senator or deputy may be deprived of his liberty during the legislature, without the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, except in the case that he is apprehended in the act of committing a crime.
If a male or female legislator has been arrested, detained, or deprived in any other form of his or her liberty, the chamber to which he or she belongs, whether or not it is in session, and including one of its members, shall demand his freedom for the duration of the legislature. To this effect, the President of the Senate or of the Chamber of Deputies or a senator or deputy, according to the case, shall make a request to the Attorney General of the Republic and, if it is necessary, shall give the order to free him directly, for which all the support of the public force may be required and should be given to him.
Parliamentary immunity authorized in the previous article does not constitute a personal privilege of the legislator, but rather a prerogative of the chamber to which he belongs and does not stand in the way of the initiation of actions that proceed by law at the end of the congressional mandate. When the chamber receives a request from an appropriate judicial authority, with the goal of removing the protection of one of its members, it shall proceed in accordance with that established by its internal rules and shall decide to that effect within a maximum period of two months from the issuance of the request.
Male and female legislators should attend the sessions of the legislatures and submit themselves to the rule of ineligibility and conflict of interest in the form and terms that the present Constitution and the internal regulations of the corresponding legislative chamber define. Those who do not comply with the preceding shall lose their investiture given political trial in accordance with the norms instituted by this Constitution and the regulations and may not run for a position in the National Congress within the ten years following his dismissal.
The Chambers shall meet in ordinary form the 27th of February and the 16th of August of each year. Each legislature shall last one hundred and fifty days. The Executive Power shall be able to convoke them in an extraordinary manner.
On the 16th of August of each year the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall elect their respective directive offices, formed by a president, a vice president and two secretaries.
The presidents of both chambers shall convoke their respective plenaries the first week of the month of August of every year, in order to give them a report on the legislative, administrative, and financial activities realized during the preceding period.
The legislators shall render each year a report on their administration before the electors that they represent.
The National Congress legislates and supervises in representation of the people. Consequently, it corresponds to it:
The legislative chambers, as well as the permanent and special commissions that they create, may invite ministers, vice ministers, directors, and other male and female officials of the Public Administration, as well as any physical or juridical person to offer pertinent information about the matters over which they have power.
The unwillingness of the summoned people to appear or to render the required declarations, shall be sanctioned by the criminal courts of the Republic, with the penalty provided for by the legal provisions in force for cases of contempt of public authority, at the request of the appropriate chamber.
To question ministers and vice ministers, the Governor of the Central Bank and the directors or administrators of autonomous and decentralized bodies of the State, as well as those from entities that administer public funds about matters of their competence, when agreed to by the majority of the present members, at the request of at least three legislators, as well as to gather information from other public functionaries that are competent in the subject and dependents of those previously specified.
If the male or female official summoned does not appear without a justifiable reason or his or her declarations are considered unsatisfactory, the chambers, with the vote of two thirds of their present members, may emit a vote of censure against him or her and recommend his or her dismissal from office to the President of the Republic or to the appropriate hierarchical superior for breach of responsibility.
They have the right to initiative in the formation of the laws:
Male and female legislators who exercise the right to initiative in the formation of the laws, may sustain their motion in the other chamber. In the same manner, the others that have this right may make it in both chambers personally or through a representative.
The popular legislative initiative is established through which a number of male and female citizens no less than two percent (2%) of those registered in the registry of electors, may present projects of law before the National Congress. A special law shall establish the procedure and the restrictions for the exercise of this initiative.
All projects of law admitted in one of the chambers shall be submitted to two different discussions with an interval of one day at least between one and the other discussion. In the case that it was already declared of urgency it must be discussed in two consecutive sessions.
Once a project of law has been approved in one of the chambers, it shall pass to the other for its opportune discussion, observing the same constitutional formalities. If this chamber makes changes to it, it shall return said modified project to the chamber where it began, to be made known again in unique discussion and, if said modifications are accepted, this last chamber shall send the law to the Executive Power. If they are rejected, the project shall be returned to the other chamber, and if it approves it, it shall send the law to the Executive Power. If the modifications are rejected, the project shall be considered thrown out.
Extraordinary convocations realized by the Executive Power to the legislative chambers, shall not have effects for the prevention of projects of law in progress.
All laws approved in both chambers shall be sent to the Executive Power for their promulgation or observations. If he does not make observations about them, he shall promulgate them within ten days of receiving them, if the matter was not declared urgent, in which case he shall promulgate them within five days of receiving them, and he shall make them published within ten days from the date of the promulgation. One the constitutional period for the promulgation and publication of the laws authorized by the National Congress has passed, they shall be considered promulgated and the President of the chamber that has given them to the Executive Power shall publish them.
If the Executive Power makes observations to the law that was submitted to him, he shall return it to the chamber from which it came in the term of ten days, counting from the date on which it was received. If the matter was declared urgent, he shall make his observations in the term of five days from when it was received. The Executive Power shall submit his observations indicating the articles where they occur and the reasons that motivate the observation. The chamber that received the observations shall make them included in the agenda of the day of the next session and shall discuss the law again in one reading. If after this discussion, two thirds of the present members of said chamber approve it anew, it shall be submitted to the other chamber, and if that chamber approves it by an equal majority, it shall be definitively be considered law and it shall be promulgated and published in the periods established in Article 101.
All laws for which the Executive Power makes observations to the National Congress have a period of two ordinary legislatures to be decided, otherwise the observation will be considered accepted.
Projects of law that remain pending in one of the two chambers at the close of the ordinary legislature, without prejudice to that established in Article 100, follow the constitutional process in the following legislatures, until they are converted to law or rejected. When it does not occur this way, the project shall be considered as if it was not initiated.
All projects of law received in a chamber, after being approved in the other, shall be included in the agenda of the day of the first session that is held.
When a law is sent to the President of the Republic for its promulgation and the time that is left for the term of the legislature is less than that established in Article 102 for observations, the legislature shall remain open to become familiar with the observations, or the process shall be continued in the following legislature without prejudice to that provided in Article 103.
The rejected projects of law in one chamber may not be presented in either of the two chambers until the following legislature.
The bicameral laws and resolutions shall be headed: The National Congress. In the name of the Republic.
The laws, after being promulgated, shall be published in the form that the law determines and shall be given the broadest diffusion possible. They shall be obligatory once the periods for them to be considered known in all the national territory have passed.
The law only provides for and is applied to the future. It does not have retroactive effect unless it is favorable to one who is subject to justice or completing a sentence. In no case may the public powers or the law affect or alter the juridical security derived from established situations according to a previous legislation.
The laws relative to the public order, policy and security obligate all the inhabitants of the territory and may not be diminished by individual conventions.
The organic laws are those that by their nature rule the fundamental rights, the structure and organization of the public powers, the public function, the electoral rules, the rules of economic financing, the public budget, planning, and investment, the territorial organization, the constitutional proceedings, the security and defense, the matters expressly referred to by the Constitution and others of an equal nature. For their approval or modification the favorable vote of two thirds of those present in both chambers shall be required.
The ordinary laws are those that by their nature require for their approval the absolute majority of the votes of those present in each chamber.
It is the responsibility of the President of the Republic to render his accounts annually, before the National Congress, of the budgetary, financial, and management administration that occurred in the previous year, according to that established in Article 128, number 2, section f of this Constitution, accompanied by a message that explains the macroeconomic and fiscal projections, the economic, financial, and social results expected and the principal priorities that the government proposed to execute within the Law of the General Budget of the State approved for the year in course.
The law shall regulate the procedures required for the two legislative chambers for examination of the reports of the Chamber of Accounts, examination of the acts of the Executive Power, invitations, questionings, political trial and the other mechanisms of control established by this Constitution.
The Defender of the People shall render to the National Congress the annual report of his activities, no more than thirty days before the close of the first ordinary legislature.
The Senate and the Chamber of Deputies shall hold their sessions separately, except when the National Assembly meets.
The chambers shall meet in National Assembly in the cases indicated in this Constitution, more than half of the members of each chamber must be present. Their decisions shall be made by absolute majority of votes, except when they are convoked to reform the Constitution.
The National Assembly or the Joint Meeting of both chambers is ruled by their rules of organization and functioning. In both cases, the President of the Senate shall assume the presidency, the President of the Chamber of Deputies shall assume the vice presidency, and the secretariat shall be assumed by the secretaries of each chamber.
In the case of the temporary or definitive absence of the male or female President of the Senate and while his substitute has not been elected by said Legislative Chamber, the male or female President of the Chamber of Deputies shall preside over the National Assembly or the Joint Meeting.
In the case of the temporary or definitive absence of the male or female President of both chambers, the male or female Vice President of the Senate, and in his absence, the male or female Vice President of the Chamber of Deputies shall preside over the National Assembly or Joint Meeting.
It is the responsibility of the National Assembly:
The chambers meet jointly in the following cases:
The Executive Power is exercised in the name of the people by the male or female President of the Republic, in his or her condition as head of State and of government in accordance with that provided by this Constitution and the law.
In order to be President of the Republic, one is required:
The Executive Power is exercised by the male or female President of the Republic, who shall be elected every four years by direct vote. The male or female President of the Republic may opt for a second consecutive constitutional term and may never again run for the same office or the Vice Presidency of the Republic.
There shall be a male or female Vice President of the Republic, elected jointly with the President in the same form and for an equal period. In order to be Vice President of the Republic the same conditions are required as to be President.
The President and Vice President of the Republic elected in general elections shall give an oath of office the 16th of August following their election, the date on which the term of the exiting authorities ends. Consequently:
The male or female President and the male or female Vice President elect of the Republic, before entering office, shall give before the National Assembly the following oath: “I swear before God and before the people, by the Country and by my honor, to fulfill and make fulfilled the Constitution and the laws of the Republic, to protect and defend its independence, to respect the rights and the liberties of the male and female citizens and to faithfully fulfill the duties of my office.
The male or female President of the Republic directs the internal and exterior policy, the civil and military administration, and is the supreme authority of the Armed Forced, the National Police, and the other bodies of security of the State.
The presidential succession shall be ruled by the following norms:
In case of the definitive absence of the Vice President of the Republic, before or after his swearing in, the President of the Republic, in a period of thirty days, shall present a shortlist to the National Assembly for his election. Once the period has passed without the President having presented a shortlist, the National Assembly shall realize the election.
The male or female President of the Republic may not travel abroad for more than fifteen days without the authorization of the National Congress.
The male or female President and Vice President of the Republic may only resign before the National Assembly.
Without prejudice to that provided for in Article 80, number 1 of this Constitution, the male or female President and the Vice President of the Republic, elect or in office, may not be deprived of their liberty.
For the handling of the matters of government there shall be ministries that are created by law. Each ministry shall be headed by one minister and shall have the vice ministers that are considered necessary for the handling of their affairs.
In order to be a minister or vice minister, one is required to be a male or female Dominican in full exercise of civil and political rights and to have reached the age of twenty-five years. Naturalized people may only be ministers or vice ministers ten years after having acquired Dominican nationality. Ministers and vice minister may not exercise any professional or commercial activity that could create conflicts of interest.
The law shall determine the powers of ministers and vice ministers.
The Council of Ministers is the organ of coordination of the general affairs of the government and has as its end to organize and accelerate the handling of the aspects of the Public Administration in benefit of the general interests of the Nation and in service of the citizenry. It shall be formed by the President of the Republic, who shall preside over it, the Vice President, and the ministers.
The Public Administration is subject in its conduct to the principles of efficiency, hierarchy, objectivity, equality, transparency, economy, publicity, and coordination, with full submission to the juridical set of laws of the State. The law shall regulate:
The courts shall control the legality of the conduct of the Public Administration. The citizenry can demand this control through the procedures established by law.
No public institution or autonomous entity that manages public funds shall establish norms or provisions that tend to increase the remuneration or benefits of its administrators or executives, but rather for a period following that for which they were elected or appointed. The inobservance of this provision shall be sanctioned in accordance with the law.
The law shall create autonomous and decentralized bodies in the State, provided with juridical character, with administrative, financial, and technical autonomy. These bodies shall be assigned to the sector of the administration that is compatible with their activities, under the watch of the male or female head minister of the sector. The law and the Executive Power shall regulate the policies of non-concentration of the services of the public administration.
The Statute of Public Office is a rule of public right based on the merit and professionalization for an efficient management and accomplishment of the essential functions of the State. This statute shall determine the form of entering, ascent, evaluation of work, permanence, and separation of the public servant from his role.
The law shall determine the statutory rule required for the professionalization of the different institutions of the Public Administration.
No official or employee of the State may take on, in a simultaneous manner, more than one paid office, except for teaching. The law shall establish the methods of compensation of male and female officials and employees of the State, in accordance with criteria of merit and characteristic of their giving service.
The dismissal of public servants that belong to the Administrative Career in violation of the rule of Public Office shall be considered an act contrary to the Constitution and the law.
All forms of corruption in the organs of the State are condemned. Consequently:
Public services are meant to satisfy the necessities of collective interest. They shall be declared by law. Consequently:
Juridical persons of public right and their officials or agents shall be responsible, jointly and mutually, in accordance with the law, for damages and prejudices occasioned on physical or juridical persons for an anti-juridical administrative action or omission.
Justice is administered for free, in the name of the Republic, by the Judicial Power. This power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Justice and the other courts created by this Constitution and the law.
The judicial function consists of administering justice in order to decide on conflicts between physical and moral people, in private or public right, in all types of processes, judging and making judgments executed. Its exercise is the responsibility of the courts and the judgments determined by law. The Judicial Power enjoys functional, administrative, and budgetary autonomy.
The courts shall not exercise more functions than those granted to them by the Constitution and the law.
All decisions emanating from a court may be appealed before a superior court, subject to the conditions and exceptions established by law.
The law shall regulate the juridical statute of the judicial career, the income, education, ascent, promotion, disassociation, and retirement of the judge, in accordance with the principles of merit, ability, and professionalism, as well as the regime of retirements and pensions of judges, officials, and employees of the judicial order.
The law also shall regulate the National School of Judiciary, which shall have as its function the initial education of males and females who aspire to be judges, assuring their technical training.
In order to be appointed judge of the Judicial Power, all those who aspire must submit themselves to a public competition on merits through the system of enrollment in the National School of Judiciary to the effect that the law establishes and have satisfactorily passed the program of education of said school. Only the members of the Supreme Court of Justice who are freely elected are exempt of these requirements.
Male and Female judges who are members of the Judicial Power are independent, impartial, responsible, and fixed and are subject to the Constitution and the laws. They may not be removed, separated, suspended, transferred or retired, except for any of the established causes and with the guarantees given in the law.
The Supreme Court of Justice is the superior jurisdictional organ of all the judicial bodies. It is integrated by no less than 16 judges and it may meet, deliberate, and be absent validly with the quorum determined by the law that establishes its organization. It shall be divided into chambers, in accordance with the law.
In order to be a male or female judge of the Supreme Court of Justice, one is required:
It is the exclusive responsibility of the Supreme Court of Justice, without prejudice to the other powers that the law confers it:
The Council of the Judicial Power shall be integrated in the following form:
The members of this council, with the exception of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall remain in these offices for five years, shall cease in the exercise of their jurisdictional functions while they are members of said council and may not opt for a new period on the council.
The law shall define the functioning and organization of this council.
The Council of the Judicial Power is the permanent organ of administration and discipline of the Judicial Power. It shall have the following functions:
There will be appellate courts and their equivalents that the law determines, as well as the number of judges that should compose it and its territorial responsibilities.
In order to be a judge of a Court of Appeals, one is required:
The powers of the appellate courts are:
There shall be court of first instance or their equivalents, with the number of judges and the territorial responsibilities that the law determines.
In order to be a judge of first instance, one is required:
The law shall determine the number of courts of peace or their equivalents, their powers, territorial responsibilities and the form in which they shall be organized.
In order to be a judge of peace, one is required:
The Contentious Administrative Jurisdiction shall be integrated by superior administrative courts and contentious administrative courts of first instance. Their powers, integration, location, territorial responsibilities, and proceedings shall be determined by the law. The superior courts may divide themselves into chambers and their decisions are susceptible to appeal.
The male and female judges of the superior administrative courts shall meet the same requirements demanded of the judges of appellate courts.
The male and female judges of the contentious administrative courts shall meet the same requirements demanded of the judges of first instance.
The following are powers of the superior administrative courts, without prejudice to the others provided by law:
The Public Administration shall be permanently represented before the Contentious Administrative Jurisdiction by the General Administrative Attorney and, if it proceeds, by the lawyers that he appoints. The General Administrative Attorney shall be appointed by the Executive Power. The law shall regulate that representation of the other organs and bodies of the State.
The General Administrative Attorney must meet the same conditions required to be the Attorney General of the Appellate Court.
The law shall provide for the creation of specialized jurisdictions when they are required for reasons of public interest or of efficiency of service for the treatment of other matters.
The Public Ministry is the organ of the system of justice that is responsible for the formulation and implementation of the policy of the State against criminality, directs criminal investigation and exercises public action in representation of society.
In the exercise of its functions, the Public Ministry shall guarantee the fundamental rights that belong to male and female citizens, shall promote the alternative resolution of disputes, shall provide for the protection of victims and witnesses and shall defend the public interest guarded by the law.
The law shall regulate the functioning of the penitentiary system under the direction of the Public Ministry or another body constituted in this effect.
The Public Ministry enjoys functional, administrative, and budgetary autonomy. It exercises its function in accordance to the principles of legality, objectivity, unity of action, hierarchy, indivisibility, and responsibility.
The President of the Republic shall appoint the Attorney General of the Republic and half of the adjunct attorneys. In order to be Attorney General of the Republic or adjunct, one must have the same requirements as to be judge of the Supreme Court of Justice. The law shall provide the form of appointment of the other members of the Public Ministry.
The Public Ministry is formed by the Attorney General of the Republic, who directs it, and by the other male and female representatives established by law.
The Public Ministry shall be represented before the Supreme Court of Justice by the Attorney General of the Republic and by the male and female adjunct attorneys, in accordance with the law. Its representation before the other judicial instances shall be provided for by law.
The office of representative of the Public Ministry is incompatible with any other public or private office, except that of teacher, and while remaining in the exercise of his office, one may not opt for any public elective role or participate in party political activities.
The Public Ministry is organized in accordance with the law, which regulates its non-removability, disciplinary regime and the other precepts that rule its actions, its educational school and its organs of government, guaranteeing the permanence of its career members until seventy-five years.
The organ of internal government of the Public Ministry is the Superior Council of the Public Ministry, which shall be integrated in the following manner:
The law shall define the functioning and organization of this council.
The functions of the Superior Council of the Public Ministry are the following:
The service of Public Defense is an organ of the system of justice equipped with administrative and functional autonomy, which has as its ends guaranteeing the effective guardianship of the fundamental right to defense in the different areas of its power. The service of Public Defense shall be offered in all the national territory attending to the criteria of lack of payment, easy access, equality, efficiency, and quality, for people charged that for whatever reason are not represented by a lawyer. The Law of Public Defense shall rule the functioning of this institution.
The State shall be responsible for organizing programs and services of free legal assistance in favor of people who lack economic resources to obtain judicial representation of their interests, particularly for the protection of the right of victims, without prejudice to the powers that correspond to the Public Ministry in the realm of the criminal process.
The National Council of the Magistrature shall be integrated by:
The National Council of the Magistrature shall have the following functions:
The National Council of the Magistrature at forming the Supreme Court of Justice must select three fourths of its members from judges that belong to the system of judicial career and the remaining quarter shall be chosen from professionals of law, academics or members of the Public Ministry.
The National Council of Magistrature, at appointing the male and female judges of the Supreme Court of Justice, shall provide which of them shall occupy the presidency and shall appoint first and second substitutes to replace the President in case of absence or impediment. The President and his substitutes shall exercise these functions for a period of seven years, at the end of which, and given evaluation of their work realized by the National Council of Magistrature, may be elected for a new period.
In case of a lack of judge invested with the qualities expressed above, the National Council of Magistrature shall appoint a new judge with equal quality or assign it to another of the judges of the Supreme Court of Justice.
The judges of the Supreme Court of Justice shall be subject to evaluation of their work at the end of seven years from their election, by the National Council of the Magistrature. In cases in which the National Council of the Magistrature decides it pertinent to separate a judge from his office, it must support its decision in the motives contained in the law that rules the subject.
The National Council of the Magistrature, at the forming the Constitutional Court, shall provide which one of them shall occupy the presidency and shall appoint first and second substitutes to replace the President in case of absence or impediment.
The National Council of Magistrature, at appointing the judges and their substitutes of the Superior Electoral Court, shall appoint which of them shall occupy the presidency.
There shall be a Constitutional Court to guarantee the supremacy of the Constitution, the defense of the constitutional order and the protection of fundamental rights. Its decisions are definitive and irrevocable and constitute binding precedents for the public powers and all the organs of the State. It shall enjoy administrative and budgetary autonomy.
The Constitutional Court shall be responsible for knowing in sole instance:
The Constitutional Court shall be integrated by thirteen members and its decisions shall be adopted with a majority qualified by nine or more of its members. The judges that have cast a dissident vote may make their motivations known in the adopted decision.
In order to be a judge of the Constitutional Court, the same conditions demanded for judges of the Supreme Court are required. Its members shall not be removable during the time of their mandate. The condition of judge may only be lost by death, resignation, or dismissal for grave errors in the exercise of one’s functions, in which case a person may be appointed to complete the period.
The judges of this court shall be appointed for a sole period of nine years. They may not be reelected, except those who have occupied the office for a period less than five years as replacements. The composition of the Court shall be renewed in a gradual manner every three years.
The courts of the Republic shall know the pleadings of constitutionality in the matters submitted for their review.
The law shall regulate the constitutional proceedings and that relative to the organization and the functioning of the Constitutional Court.
The Defender of the People is an independent authority in his functions and with administrative and budgetary autonomy. He is obligated exclusively to the mandate of this Constitution and the laws.
The essential function of the Defender of the People is to contribute to safeguard the fundamental rights of people and the collective and diffuse interests established in this Constitution and the law, in case of their being violated by officials or organs of the State, by lenders of public or individual services that affect collective and diffuse interests. The law shall regulate that which is related to its organization and functioning.
The Defender of the People and his adjuncts shall be appointed by the Senate for a period of six years, from shortlists proposed by the Chamber of Deputies and shall remain in the role until they are substituted. The Chamber of Deputies shall choose the shortlists in an ordinary legislature prior to the completion of the term of the mandate of the appointed and shall submit them before the Senate in a period that shall not exceed the fifteen days following its approval. The Senate of the Republic shall effectuate the election before the thirty following days.
Once the periods have ended without the Chamber of Deputies having chosen and presented the shortlists, the same shall be chosen and presented to the Senate by the Full Supreme Court of Justice. If it is the Senate that does not effectuate the election in the given period, the Supreme Court of Justice shall elects from the shortlists presented by the Chamber of Deputies.
The Dominican Republic is a unitary State whose territorial organization has as its ends favoring its integral and equilibrated development and that of its inhabitants, compatible with its needs and with the preservation of its natural resources, of its national identity, and its cultural values. The territorial organization shall be made in accordance with the principles of unity, identity, political, administrative, social and economic rationality.
The formulation and execution, through law, of a plan of territorial ordering that ensures the efficient and sustainable use of the natural resources of the Nation, in accordance with the necessity of adaptation to climate change, is a priority of the State,
Through the organic law the name and limits of the regions shall be determined, as well as the provinces and municipalities in which it is divided.
The region is the basic unit for the articulation and formulation of the public policies in the national territory. The law shall define all that is related to their responsibilities, composition, organization and functioning and shall determine the number of these.
Without prejudice to the principle of solidarity, the State shall procure the reasonable equilibrium of the public investment in the different geographical demarcations in a manner that is proportional to the support of these to the national economy.
The province is the intermediary political demarcation in the territory. It is divided in municipalities, municipal districts, sections and regions. The law shall define all that related to its composition, organization and functioning and shall determine the number of them.
The Executive Power shall appoint in each province a civil governor, who shall be his representative in this demarcation. In order to be civil governor one must be a male or female Dominican, older than twenty-five years of age, and be in full exercise of the civil and political rights. His powers and duties shall be determined by the law.
The National District, the municipalities and municipal districts constitute the base of the local political administrative system. They are juridical persons of Public Right, responsible for their actions, enjoy their own patrimony, budgetary autonomy, with normative and administrative power and the power of the use of their land, fixed in express manner by the law and subject to the power of supervision of the State and to the social control of the citizenry, in the terms established by this Constitution and the laws.
The town councils may establish taxes in the area of their demarcation that in an express manner the law establishes, provided that the same never interfere with the national taxes, with the inter-municipal commerce or exportation or with the Constitution or the laws. It is the responsibility of the appropriate courts to come to know the disputes that arise on this topic.
The government of the National District and that of the municipalities shall each be in charge of the town council, constituted by two organs complementary to each other, the Council of Aldermen and the Mayor’s Office. The Council of Aldermen is an exclusively normative, regulatory, and supervisory organ integrated by male and female aldermen. They shall have substitutes. The Mayor’s Office is the executive organ headed by a male or female mayor, whose substitute shall be called the male or female vice mayor.
The government of the municipal districts shall be in charge of a District Board, integrated by a male or female director who shall act as executive organ and a Board of Chairpersons with normative, regulatory, and supervisory functions. The male or female director shall have a substitute.
The political regional, provincial or municipal parties or groups shall make the presentation of candidates to the municipal and municipal district elections for male or female mayor, male or female aldermen, male or female directors and their substitutes, as well as the chairpersons, in accordance with the Constitution and the laws that rule the subject. The number of aldermen and their substitutes shall be determined by the law, in proportion to the number or inhabitants, in no case may they be less than five for the National District and the municipalities and never less than three for the municipal districts. They shall be elected every four years by the people of their jurisdiction in the form established by law.
Naturalized persons with more than five years of residency in a jurisdiction may occupy said offices, in the conditions prescribed by law.
The male or female mayors of the National District, of the municipalities, as well as the male and female directors of the municipal districts are the legal representatives of the town councils and the municipal boards. Their powers and abilities shall be determined by law.
The Organic Law of Local Administration shall establish the spheres, requirements and conditions for the exercise of the referendum, plebiscite, and normative municipal initiative with the purpose of strengthening the development of democracy and local administration.
The State shall promote the transfer of responsibilities and resources towards the local governments, in accordance with this Constitution and the law. The implementation of these transfers shall bring with it policies of institutional development, training and professionalization of human resources.
The town councils of the National District, of the municipalities and the boards of municipal districts shall be obligated, as much in the formulation as in the execution of the budgets to formulate, approve, and maintain the appropriations and the expenditures destined for each class of attention and service, in accordance with the law.
The investment of municipal resources shall be made through the progressive development of participative budgets that promote integration and citizen co-responsibility in the definition, execution, and control of the policies of local development.
The economic obligations contracted by the municipalities, including those that have the guarantee of the State are their responsibility, in accordance with the limits and conditions that the law establishes.
The exercise of suffrage to elect the authorities of government and to participate in referendums is a right and a duty of the male and female citizens. The vote is personal, free, direct, and secret. No one may be obligated or coerced under any pretext in the exercise of his right to suffrage or to reveal his vote.
Members of the Armed Forces and of the National Police, nor those who have lost the rights of citizenship or those who find themselves suspended in those rights do not have the right of suffrage.
Electoral assemblies shall function in electoral colleges that shall be organized in accordance with the law. The electoral colleges shall open every four years to elect the President and Vice President of the Republic, the legislative representatives, the municipal authorities, and the other officials or elective representatives. These elections shall happen in a separate and independent manner. Those for president, vice president, legislative and parliamentary representatives and of international bodies, on the third Sunday of the month of May and those of the municipal authorities on the third Sunday of the month of February.
Popular consultations through referendum shall be regulated by a law that determines all that is related to their celebration, in accordance with the following conditions.
The elections shall be organized, directed, and supervised by a Central Electoral Board and the electoral boards below its office, which have the responsibility of guaranteeing liberty, transparency, equity, and objectivity in the elections.
The Central Electoral Board is an autonomous organ with juridical personality and technical, administrative, budgetary and financial independence, whose principal purpose shall be to organize and direct the electoral assemblies for the celebration of elections and or mechanisms of popular participation established by the present Constitution and the laws. It shall have regulatory ability in the matters that are its responsibility.
The Central Electoral Board shall be integrated by a president and four members and their substitutes, elected for a period of four years by the Senate of the Republic, by the vote of two thirds of the senators present.
The Civil Registry and the Identity and Electoral Card shall be dependents of the Central Electoral Board.
During the elections the Central Electoral Board shall assume the direction and command of the public force in accordance with the law.
The Central Electoral Board shall safeguard that the electoral processes are realized subject to the principles of liberty and equity in the development of the campaigns and transparency in the utilization of financing. Consequently, it shall have the ability to regulate the time periods and limits in the spending of the campaign, as well as the equitable access to the means of communications.
In the National District and in each municipality there shall be an Electoral Board with administrative and contentious functions. In administrative matters they shall be subordinated to the Central Electoral Board. In contentious matters their decisions are appealable before the Superior Electoral Court, in accordance with the law.
The Superior Electoral Court is the appropriate organ to judge and decide with definitive character on the contentious electoral matters and to ordain over the disagreements that arise internally from the parties, groups, and political movements or between them. It shall regulate, in accordance with the law, the proceedings of its responsibility and all that is related to its administrative and financial organization and functioning.
The Court shall be integrated by no less than three and no more than four electoral judges and their substitutes, appointed for a period of four years by the National Council of the Magistrature, who shall indicate which of them shall occupy the presidency.
The organization of parties, groups and political movements is free and subject to the principles established in this Constitution. Their conformation and functioning should support themselves in respect for internal democracy and transparency, in accordance with the law. Its essential purposes are:
The economic regime is oriented towards the search for human development. It is based on economic growth, redistribution of wealth, social justice, equity, social and territorial cohesion and environmental sustainability in a framework of free competition, equality of opportunities, social responsibility, participation and solidarity.
Private initiative is free. The State shall ensure, together with the private sector, an equilibrated and sustained growth of the economy, with stability of prices, tending toward full employment and the increase of social well-being, through rational utilization of the available resources, the permanent education of human resources and scientific and technological development.
The State foments private economic initiative, creating policies necessary to promote the development of the country. Under the principle of subsidiarity of the State, by its own account or in association with the private and supportive sector, may exercise business activity with the end of ensuring access of the population to basic assets and services and promoting the national economy.
When the state sells off its participation in a business, it may take the methods conducive to democratizing the ownership of its actions and offer to its workers, the solidarity organizations of workers, special conditions to gain said active property. The law shall regulate the subject.
All contracts of the State and persons of Public Right with physical or juridical foreign persons housed in the country, should count on submission to the laws and jurisdictional organs of the Republic. Nevertheless, the State and the other persons of Public Right may submit the disputes derived from contractual relations to jurisdictions constituted in virtue of international treaties in effect. They may also submit them to national and international arbitrage in accordance with the law.
Business activity, public or private, receives the same legal treatment. Equality of conditions of national and foreign investment is guaranteed, with the limitations established in this Constitution and the laws. The law shall concede special treatment to investments that are located in zones with a lower degree of development or in activities of national interest, in particular located in border provinces.
The State recognizes the contribution of popular economic initiatives to the development of the country, foments the conditions of integration of the informal sector in the national economy, incentivizes and protects micro, small, and medium development of businesses, cooperatives, family businesses, and other forms of community association for work, production, savings, and consumption, that generate conditions that permit access to convenient financing, technical assistance, and training.
The regulation of the monetary and financial system of the Nation is the responsibility of the Monetary Board as the superior organ of the Central Bank.
The Monetary Board is integrated by no more than nine members including the Governor of the Central Bank, who presides over it, and ex officio members whose number shall not be more than three.
The Central Bank of the Republic is an entity of Public Right with juridical personality, its own patrimony, and functional, budgetary, and administrative autonomy.
The Monetary Board, represented by the Governor of the Central Bank, shall be in charge of the direction and adequate application of the monetary, exchange, and financial policies of the Nation and the coordination of the regulatory entities of the system and of the financial market.
The Monetary Board, represented by the Governor of the Central Bank, will have at its responsibility the direction and adequate application of the monetary, exchange and financial policies of the Nation and the coordination of the regulatory entities of the financial system and of the financial market.
The Central Bank, whose capital is property of the State, is the sole issuer of bills and coins of national circulation and has as its objective to watch for the stability of prices.
The national monetary unit is the Dominican Peso.
Only bills issues and coins minted by the Central Bank shall have legal circulation and tender, under the unlimited guarantee of the State and in the proportions and conditions indicated by law.
The issuance of paper, coins, or other monetary signs not authorized by this Constitution is prohibited.
By exception of that provided in Article 122 of this Constitution, the modification of the legal regime of coin or of the bank shall require the support of two thirds of the totality of the members of one and the other legislative chamber, provided that it has been initiated by the Executive Power, at the proposal of the Monetary Board or with the favorable vote of the same, in which case it shall be ruled by the related provisions of the organic laws.
The elaboration of the project of Law of General Budget of the State, which considers the probable income, proposed expenses, and the required financing, realized in a framework of fiscal sustainability, ensuring that public indebtedness is compatible with the capacity of payment of the State, is the responsibility of the Executive Power.
In this project the assignments that are the responsibilities of the different institutions of the State shall be allocated in an individualized manner.
Congress may include new line items and modify those that figure into the project of Law of General Budget of the State or in the project of law that distribute funds submitted by the Executive Power, with the vote of two thirds of those present of each legislative chamber.
Once the Law of General Budget of the State is voted, budgetary resources from on institution or another may not be transferred, unless in virtue of a law that, when it is not initiated by the Executive Power, shall have the vote of two thirds of those present in each legislative chamber.
The National Congress may modify the project of Law of General Budget of the State when it is submitted later than the date referred to by Article 128, number 2, part g, with the absolute majority of the membership of each chamber.
No distribution of public funds shall be valid if it was not authorized by the law and ordered by an appropriate official.
Laws that order, authorize a payment, or engender a pecuniary obligation to the charge of the State shall not have effect nor validity unless this same law identifies or establishes the resources necessary for its execution.
It is the responsibility of the State to realize an equitable assignment of the public spending in the territory. Its planning, programming, execution and evaluation shall respond to the principles of subsidiarity and transparency, as well as the criteria of efficiency, priority, and economy.
When the Congress has not approved the project of Law of General Budget of the State later than the 31st of December, the Law of General Budget of the State of the previous year shall rule, with the adjustments given in the Organic Law of Budget, until its approval is produced.
Annually, in the month of April, the general account of the incomes and expenditures of the Republic made in the year shall be published.
The Executive Power, after consulting the Economic and Social Council and the political parties, shall elaborate and submit to the National Congress a strategy of development that shall define the vision of the Nation for the long term. The process of planning and public investment shall be rules by the corresponding law.
The Multi-Year National Plan of the Public Sector and its corresponding updates shall be sent to the National Congress by the Executive Power, during the second legislature of the year in which the period of government begins, ager consulting the Council of Ministers for knowledge of the programs and projected that will be executed during its effectiveness. The results and impacts of its execution shall be realized in a framework of fiscal sustainability.
The tax regime is based in the principles of legality, justice, equality and equity so that each male and female citizen may fulfill the maintenance of the public burdens.
Individuals may only acquire, through concessions that the law or authorizes or contracts that the National Congress approves, the right to benefit, for all the time that the concession or contract stipulates and fulfilling the obligations that one and another impose on them, of exemptions, exonerations, reductions or limitations of taxes, contributions, or fiscal or municipal rights that occur in certain works or businesses towards which it has been agreed to attract investment of new capitals for the growth of the national economy or for any other goal of social interest. The transference of rights authorized through contracts shall be subject to ratification on the part of the National Congress.
The Dominican State and all its institutions, be they autonomous, decentralized or not, shall be ruled by a sole, uniform, integrated, and harmonized system of accounting, whose criteria shall be fixed by the law.
The control and supervision over the patrimony, income, expenses, and use of public funds shall be achieved by the National Congress, the Chamber of Accounts, the General Controller of the Republic in the frameworks of their respective responsibilities, and by the society through the mechanisms established in the laws.
The Controller General of the Republic is the organ of the Executive Power governing the internal control, exercise of internal supervision and the evaluation of the due collection, management, use and investment of the public resources and authorizes the orders of payment, after proof of fulfillment of the legal and administrative processes of the institutions under its sphere, in accordance with the law.
The Chamber of Accounts is the superior external organ of fiscal control of the public resources, of the administrative processes and of the patrimony of the State. It has juridical personality, technical character and enjoys administrative, operative, and budgetary autonomy. It shall be composed of five members, elected by the Senate of the Republic from the shortlists presented to it by the Chamber of Deputies, for a period of four years and shall remain in their functions until their substitutes are appointed.
In order to be a member of the Chamber of Accounts one must be a male or female Dominican in full exercise of the civil and political rights, be of recognized ethical and moral solvency, have reached the age of thirty years, have a university degree and be prepared for the professional exercise, preferably in the areas of accounting, finance, economics, law or something related, and the other conditions that the law determines.
Its powers shall be, other than those conferred to it by law:
The social agreement is an essential instrument to ensure the organized participation of employers, workers, and other organizations of society in the construction and permanent strengthening of the social peace. In order to promote it, there shall be an Economic and Social Council, consultative organ of the Executive Power in economic, social and labor subjects, whose conformation and functioning shall be established by the law.
The defense of the Nation is the charge of the Armed Forces. Accordingly:
The custody, supervision and control of all arms, munitions and other military supplies, material and equipment of war that enter the country or are produced by the national industry is the responsibility of the Armed Forces, with the restrictions established in the law.
The entering, appointing, ascent, retirement, and other aspect of the regime of military career of the members of the Armed Forces shall be affected without any discrimination, in accordance with its organic law and complementary laws. The reinstatement of its members is prohibited, with the exception of the cases in which the separation or retirement was realized in violation of the Organic Law of the Armed Forces, after investigation and recommendation by the corresponding ministry, in accordance with the law.
The military jurisdiction only has the competence to come to know the military infractions given in the laws about the subject. The Armed Forces shall have a disciplinary military regime applicable to those faults that do not constitute infractions of the criminal military regime.
The National Police is an armed, technical, profession body of a police nature, under the authority of the President of the Republic, obedient to civil power, without party ties and without the ability, in any case, to deliberate. The National Police has as its mission:
The entering, appointment, ascent, retirement, and other aspects of the regime of the police career of the members of the National Police shall be affected without any discrimination, in accordance with its organic law and the complementary laws. The reinstatement of its members, with the exception of the cases in which the retirement or separation was realized in violation of the organic law of the National Police, after investigation and recommendation of the corresponding ministry, in accordance with the law.
The police jurisdiction only has the competence to come to know the police infractions given in the laws on the subject. The National Police shall have a police disciplinary regime applicable to those faults that do not constitute infractions of the criminal police regime.
The Council of Security and National Defense is a consultative organ that assists the President of the Republic in the formulation of the policies and strategies on this subject and in any matter that the Executive Power submits for its consideration. The Executive Power shall regulate its composition and functioning.
The Armed Forces of the Republic, in the development of its mission, shall have an essentially defensive character, without prejudice to that provided in Article 260.
High priority national objectives are:
The National Congress, at the request of the President of the Republic, may provide for, when the national interest requires, the formation of permanent public security of defense corps with members from the Armed Forces and the National Police that shall be subordinates of the ministry or institution of the realm of their respective competencies in virtue of the law. The system of intelligence of the State shall be regulated through the law.
Those extraordinary situations that gravely affect the security of the Nation, of the institutions and of the people before which the ordinary abilities are insufficient are considered states of exception. The President of the Republic, with the authorization of the National Congress, may declare the states of exception in three modalities: State of Defense, State of Interior Commotion and State of Emergency.
In the case of the national sovereignty or the territorial integrity being seen as in grave and imminent danger by external armed aggressions, the Executive Power, without prejudice to the inherent abilities of his office, may request from the National Congress the declaration of State of Defense. In this state the following may not be suspended:
The State of Interior Commotion may be declared in all or in part of the national territory, in the case of grave disturbance of the public order that makes an attempt against institutional stability, the security of the State or citizen coexistence in an imminent manner or that may not be avoided through the use of the ordinary powers of the authorities.
The State of Emergency may be declared when facts different from those discussed in Articles 263 and 264 occur that disturb or threaten to disturb in a grave an imminent manner the economic, social environmental order of the country or that constitute a public calamity.
The states of exception shall be subject to the following provisions:
The reform of the Constitution may only be made in the form that it itself indicates, and may never be suspended nor annulled for any reason or by any authority nor by popular acclamations.
No modification to the Constitution may deal with the form of government which must always be civil, republican, democratic, and representative.
This Constitution may be reformed if the reform proposition is presented in the National Congress with the support of one third of the members of one or the other chamber, or if it is submitted by the Executive Power.
The necessity of constitutional reform shall be declared by a law of convocation. This law, to which the Executive Power may not make observations, shall order the meeting of the National Revisory Assembly, shall contain the object of the reform and shall indicate the article or articles of the Constitution about which they shall deal.
In order to decide on the proposed reform, the National Revisory Assembly shall meet within the fifteen days following the publication of the law that declares the necessity of the reform, with the presence of more than half of the members of each one of its chambers. Its decisions shall be made by the majority of two thirds of the votes. Constitutional reform may not be made in the case of the effect of one of the states of exception given in Article 262. Once the reform is voted on and proclaimed by the National Revisory Assembly, the Constitution shall be published in full with the reformed texts.
When the reform deals with rights, fundamental guarantees and duties, the territorial and municipal ordering, the regime of nationality, citizenship, and foreigners, the regime of coin, and over the procedures of reform instituted in this Constitution, it shall require the ratification of the majority of the male and female citizens with electoral rights, in an approval referendum convoked for that effect by the Central Electoral Board, once voted and approved by the National Revisory Assembly.
The Central Electoral Board shall submit the reforms for referendum within the sixty days following its formal reception.
The approval of the reforms to the Constitution by way of referendum requires more than half of the votes of those who may vote and that the number of those exceeds thirty percent of the total of male and female citizens that form the Electoral Register, adding the voters that express themselves with “YES” or with “NO.”
If the result of the referendum is affirmative, the reform shall be proclaimed and published in full with the reformed texts by the National Revisory Assembly.
The grammatical genders that are adopted in the wording of the text of this Constitution do not signify, in any way, restriction to the principle of equality of rights of women and men.
The elected exercise of the President and Vice President of the Republic, as well as the legislative representatives and parliamentary members of international organs, shall end uniformly on the 16th of August of every four years, the date on which the corresponding constitutional term begins, with the exceptions given in this Constitution.
The municipal authorities elected on the third Sunday of February of each four years shall take possession on the 24th of April of the same year.
When an elected official stops in the exercise of the office due to death, resignation, disqualification or another reason, he who substitutes him shall remain in the exercise of the office until the term is complete.
The members of constitutional organs, once the period of the mandate for which they were appointed ends, shall remain in their offices until those who substitute them take possession.
Thee person appointed to exercise a public office shall take an oath to respect the Constitution and the laws, and to faithfully carry out the duties of his office. This path shall be taken before an appropriate public functionary or official.
All judicial decisions that have acquired the authority of an irrevocably judged matter, especially those dictated in an exercise of direct control of the constitutionality by the Supreme Court of Justice, until the moment of the proclamation of the present Constitution, may not be examined by the Constitutional Court and those after shall be subject to the process that the law that rules the subject determines.
The Council of Judicial Power shall be created within the six months after the entrance into effect of the present Constitution.
The Constitutional Court, established in the present Constitution, shall be formed within the twelve months following the entrance into effect of the same.
The Supreme Court of Justice shall maintain the functions attributed by this Constitution to the Constitutional Court and to the Council of Judicial Power until these instances have been integrated.
The current judges of the Supreme Court of Justice that are not left in retirement by having reached seventy-five years of age shall be submitted to an evaluation of work by the National Council of Magistrature, which shall determine their confirmation.
The Superior Council of the Public Ministry shall carry out the functions established in the present Constitution within the six months following the entry into effect of the same.
The existing Contentious Administrative and Tax Court shall become the Superior Administrative Court created by this Constitution. The Supreme Court of Justice shall provide the administrative methods necessary for its adaptation, until the Council of Judicial Power is integrated.
The current members of the Central Electoral Board shall remain in their offices until the conformation of the new organs created by the present Constitution and the appointment of their incumbents.
The provisions related to the Central Electoral Board and to the Superior Electoral Court established in this Constitution shall enter into effect starting from the new integration that is produced in the period that begins on the 16th of August of 2010. Exceptionally, the members of those electoral organs shall exercise their mandate until the 16th of August of 2016.
The process of appointment that is established in the present Constitution for the members of the Chamber of Accounts shall rule beginning on the 16th of August of the year 2010. Exceptionally, the members of this organ shall remain in their offices until 2016.
The dispositions contained in article 272 related to the approval referendum, by exception, are not applicable to the present constitutional reform.
The laws to which observations are made by the Executive Power that have not been decided by the National Congress at the moment of the entrance into effect of this Constitution, shall be approved in the two ordinary legislatures following the proclamation of the present Constitution. Once this period has ended, the same shall be considered as not initiated.
All the authorities elected through direct vote in the congressional and municipal elections of the year 2010, exceptionally, shall last in their offices until the 16th of August 2016.
The male and female deputies, to be elected in representation of the Dominican communities in the exterior shall be elected, exceptionally the third Sunday of May of the year 2012 for a period of four years.
By exception, the electoral assemblies to elect the municipal authorities shall be celebrated in the year 2010 and 2016 the third Sunday of May.
The contracts pending decision left with the National Congress at the time of the approval of the provisions contained in article 128, number 2, part d, of this Constitution shall exhaust the legislations steps provided in the Constitution of the year 2002.
The law that shall regulate the general organization and administration of the State shall provide that related to the ministries to which Article 134 of this Constitution refers. This law shall enter into effect at the latest in October of 2011, with the objective that the new provisions are incorporated in the General Budges of the State for the following year.
That provided in this Constitution for the elaboration and approval of the Law of General Budget of the State shall enter into full effect beginning on the first of January of 2010, in such a manner that for the year 2011 the country will have a budget in accordance with that established in this Constitution.
The budgetary provisions for the implementation of the organs that are created in the present Constitution shall be contained in the budget of 2010, in a manner that ensures its full entry into effect in the year 2011.
In order to guarantee the gradual renovation of the membership of the Constitutional Court, by exception of that provided in Article 187, its first thirteen member shall be substituted in three groups, two of four and one of five, at six, nine, and twelve years of exercise, respectively, through a random process. The first four judges to leave, by exception, may be considered for a single new period.
In the case that the President of the Republic corresponding to the constitutional term 2012-2016 is a candidate for the same office for the constitutional period 2016-2020, he may not present himself for the following term nor any other term nor for the Vice Presidency of the Republic.
This Constitution shall enter into effect starting from its proclamation by the National Assembly and its full and immediate publication ordered.
