We, the people of Equatorial Guinea, conscious of our responsibility before God and history;
Driven by the will to safeguard our independence, organize and consolidate our national unity;
Desirous of upholding the authentic African spirit of the positive tradition of family and communal organization, adapting it to new social and judicial structures consistent with modern life;
Conscious that the charismatic authority of the traditional family is the foundation of the Equatoguinean Society;
Firmly supported by the principles of social justice and solemnly reaffirmed by the rights and liberties of men defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of October 10, 1948;
The African Charter of Rights of Man and of Peoples of June 26, 1981;
Adopt the following Fundamental Law of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea.
Sovereignty belongs to the people, who exercise it by way of universal suffrage. From it emanate the public powers that are exercised in the conditions determined by this Fundamental Law and other laws. No fraction of the people or individual shall attribute itself the exercise of National Sovereignty.
The fundamentals of the Equatoguinean society are:
The State encourages and promotes culture, artistic creation, scientific and technological research and sees to the conservation of nature, cultural heritage of the artistic and historical riches of the Nation.
The State defends the sovereignty of the Nation, strengthens its unity and ensures respect of fundamental rights of man and the promotion of the economic, social and cultural progress of its citizens.
The Equatoguinean State abides to the principles of International Law and reaffirms its attachment to the rights and obligations that arise from the Organizations and International Organizations to which it is a member.
The right to strike is recognized and is exercised in accordance with the conditions provided by the law.
The citizens, public powers, political parties, unions, associations, and other legal persons are subject to the Fundamental Law and the Judicial Order.
The enumeration of the fundamental rights recognized in this chapter does not exclude those guaranteed by the Fundamental Law, nor others of analogue nature and that are derived from human dignity, from the principle of sovereignty of the people or the social and democratic state of law and the republican form of government.
All citizens have the right and the obligation to live peacefully in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, to respect the rights of others and contribute to the formation of a just, fraternal and caring (solidaria) society.
All inhabitants of the Republic shall respect Equatorial Guinea, its national symbols, the Head of State, Government, and other institutions legally constituted.
Every citizen has the duty to respect, to comply and to defend the Fundamental Law and the Nation’s Legal Framework.
The State supports responsible paternity and the appropriate education to promote the family.
The economy of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea works through four basic sectors:
The person of the Head of State is inviolable. The law regulates the privileges and immunities of the Head of State after their mandate.
To be president of the Republic it is required:
The President of the Republic determines the policy of the Nation, arbitrates and moderates the normal functioning of all institutions of the State. His authority extends over national territory.
The President of the Republic exercises the regulatory power in the Council of Ministers.
The President of the Republic sanctions and promulgates the laws, exercises the right to veto in the terms provided by this Fundamental Law.
The President of the Republic equally exercises the following powers:
With the purpose of seeing for the territorial integrity and preserving the public order, all the National Armed Forces, Security Forces of the State and Public Order Forces entirely depend for all effects on the President of the Republic.
In the event of imminent danger, when the declaration of state of exception (estado de excepción) or siege is declared, the President of the Republic may suspend for a maximum time of three months the rights and guarantees established in this Fundamental Law and take exceptional measures to safeguard the territorial integrity, the national independence, the Institutions of the State and functioning of the services and public powers, informing the people by message. The term of three months referred to will be extended until the causes that motivated such suspension disappear.
For the exercise of the political and administrative function, the President of the Republic presides the Council of Ministers, first constituted by the Vice-president of the Republic in political and administrative matters.
The direction, management and administration of public services is trusted upon the Ministers in the matters of competence of the Departments of their respective branches.
Aside from the cases expressly defined by this Fundamental Law and the ones determined by other laws, the Council of Ministers has the following attributions:
The members of Government, together with the President of the Republic and Chief of Government are:
Before taking possession of his functions, the Vice-president of the Republic, the Prime Minister and other Members of the Government take the oath of fidelity before the President of the Republic, to his person and to this Fundamental Law.
The Council of Ministers in Plenum and the Ministers separately may concur with voice and without vote to the debates of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. They also concur when they are invited to inform.
The power to legislate resides in the people, who delegates it to the Parliament through universal suffrage and who exercises it within the framework of competencies provided by this Fundamental Law.
The Parliament exercises the Legislative Power of the State. Two Chambers compose it: the Chamber of the Deputies and the Senate. Both Organs participate in the formulation of laws and act separately and jointly in the manner established by this Fundamental Law and other laws in the exercise of their respective functions and competencies.
The Deputies and the Senators are not bound by imperative mandate.
The Deputies and the Senators have the right to amendment and to vote. The vote is personal.
The President of the Republic, after consulting with the Government and the Boards of both Chambers, may submit to popular consultation any question that requires the direct consultation of the People. The project adopted as such, is promulgated by the President of the Republic.
The President of the Republic, in Council of Ministers may provide for the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate and order the convocation of the general anticipated elections. If the dissolution of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate occurs during the last year of the period for which its members were elected, the election of their members takes place in accordance with the provisions of this Fundamental Law.
The vacant seats that are produced in the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate are filled in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Law.
The opening and closing of each period of sessions [,] both ordinary and extraordinary [,] is established by the Decree of the President of the Republic, in accordance with the Boards of both Chambers.
The debates of the Plenary Sessions of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate are public.
By petition of the Government or through the three fourths of Deputies or Senators, the Chamber of Deputies and Senate can hold specific closed sessions for reasons of confidentiality or security.
Aside from the cases expressly provided in other Articles of this Fundamental Law, the following are matters reserved to the Law.
If the Budgets are not presented by the Government in the course of the second ordinary session of the Chamber of Deputies and Senate, the President of the Republic will convoke an extraordinary session to this end.
Before promulgating the Law, the President of the Republic can demand a second or third reading of it to the Chamber of the Deputies and Senate.
The President of the Republic can address by its own initiative the Chamber of the Deputies and the Senate or send written messages. These communications cannot give rise to any debate in his presence, except when the session is especially dedicated to this effect.
The Agenda of the day of the Sessions of the Chamber of Deputies and Senate is established by the respective boards.
The President of the Republic promulgates and sanctions the laws adopted by the Chamber of Deputies and Senate.
The Chamber of Deputies and Senate approve their budgets of expenditures and communicate them to the Government for their consideration and inclusion in the General Budgets of the State.
The Chambers communicate in writing between them and with the other Powers of the State through their respective Presidents.
The law establishes the regime of incompatibility of the Deputies and Senators in exercise of their functions.
The common functions of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate are the following:
The Chamber of Deputies, is the legislative organ of the State and of popular representation of the Nation. It is composed of 100 members that are elected for a mandate of five years through universal, direct, and secret suffrage in general elections that are held on one day and within sixty days before or following the expiration of their mandate.
The Chamber of Deputies is competent:
The law determines the conditions for the election of Deputies.
The Senate is the organ of territorial representation and of the local corporations, in the manner determined by the law.
The Ex-Presidents of the Republic, the Ex-Vice Presidents of the Republic, the Ex-Presidents of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, are natural senators with all the rights, prerogatives and immunities, when conserving their political and social dignity and reputation.
Only those matters that fall within its specific competences may be included in the agenda of the sessions of the Senate and those that the President of the Republic and the Chamber of Deputies expressly solicit for intervention.
The following are functions of the Senate:
The Judicial Power is independent of the Legislative Power and of the Executive Power. It exercises the jurisdictional function of the State.
The exercise of the jurisdictional power in any type of process, judging and executing what has been judged [,] corresponds exclusively to the courts and tribunals determined by the Law.
The Head of State is the First Magistrate of the Nation and guarantees the independence of the jurisdictional function.
The Judges and Magistrates are submitted only to the provisions of the Law in the exercise of their functions.
The principle of jurisdictional unity is the basis of the organization and functioning of courts and tribunals. The Law establishes the juridical regime applicable to the Military Jurisdiction.
The Trials are public, except for the cases that the law establishes, but the tribunals of justice deliberate in secret.
The Supreme Court of Justice is the maximum jurisdictional organ of all the orders, save for that provided in matters of constitutional guarantees, [and] is composed of a President and eight Magistrates.
The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic has its main mission to see the strict compliance with the legality and other provisions by all the organs of the State, the regions, provinces, districts, and municipalities, as well as the citizens and foreigners living in the Country.
The members of the Constitutional Tribunal cannot be Members of Government, the Chamber of Deputies, the Senate, the Judicial or Fiscal Career, nor can occupy any office of public election.
Any organic law will regulate the functioning of the Constitutional Tribunal, the statute of its members and the procedure for the exercise of actions before it.
The Council of the Republic is a consultative State Organ of political character, in charge of advising the President of the Republic in his management during his mandate and the other powers of the State.
The matters that are subject of advice by the Council of the Republic are:
The Council of the Republic is composed of nine members elected among the Ex-Presidents of the Republic, the Ex-Presidents of the Chamber of Deputies, the Ex-Presidents of the Senate, the Ex-Presidents of the Supreme Court of Justice and the Ex-Presidents of the Constitutional Tribunal, who have exercised their offices with recognized honor and dignity, as well as other notable persons who by their proven honesty and dignity merit such designation.
The condition of Member of the Council of the Republic is incompatible with the offices of members of other organs provided by this Fundamental Law, except for the Ex-Presidents of the Republic.
The Members of the Council of the Republic cease to be in their functions in the following cases:
The Council of the Republic will be structured by:
A law shall develop the functions and competences of the Council of the Republic, as well as the immunities of its members.
All the notable officers of the State, the salaried public persons and para-public persons must make a declaration of their patrimonial assets before exercising the functions for which they are appointed.
The Accounts’ Tribunal shall have the following attributions:
The results of the preliminary investigations advanced by the Accounts’ Tribunal will have evidentiary value before the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic and before the competent judge.
The law will develop the structure and functioning of the Accounts’ Tribunal.
The law will determine the manner of exercising control and vigilance over the management of the Accounts’ Tribunal.
The Defender of the People is the high commissioned of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, designated by them for the defense of the rights of citizens included in this Fundamental Law, to which effect, he can supervise the activity of the Administration, giving notice to the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate.
The Defender of the People will be elected by the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, and will be ratified by the President of the Republic, for a period of five years.
A mixed Chamber of the Deputies-Senate commission will be designated in the Parliament, in charge of doing relations with the Defender of the People and reporting to the respective plenums [plenos] on as many occasions as necessary.
Any physical or legal person that, regarding a matter that concerns them, considers that a public organ has not functioned or acted in accordance with the mission of public service assigned to it, may file [interponer] a recourse of amparo before the Defender of the People.
The functions of the Defender of the People are:
The law establishes the organic and functional structure of the Defender of the People.
The Armed Forces and Forces of Security of the State constitute the national institution that has its main mission, to maintain the National Independence and the Territorial Integrity, to defend the National Sovereignty, to safeguard the supreme values of the Fatherland, the Security of the state, the Public Order and the normal functioning of the Public Powers. The Armed Forces and Forces of Security of the State are governed by their own regulations.
The Local Corporations are institutions with their own legal personality, in charge of the government and administration of the regions, provinces, districts, and municipalities. They promote the plans and programs of economic and social development in their respective territories in accordance with the law.
The Republican and Democratic Regime of the State of Equatorial Guinea, the National Unity, and the Territorial Integrity may not be the object of any reform
Until the new Institutions and Organs created by this Fundamental Law are placed in functioning, those actually existing remain in force.
Until the Chamber of Deputies and Senate are constituted, the current Chamber of Representatives of the People will continue exercising the functions that the Fundamental Law recognizes to the Legislative Power of the State.
Any provisions that oppose this Fundamental Law are derogated.
This Fundamental Law enters into force from its promulgation by the President of the Republic, once having been adopted by Referendum and its publication in the Official Gazette of the State [Boletín Oficial del Estado].
