We, the citizens of Georgia - whose firm will it is to establish a democratic social order, economic freedom, and a legal and a social state; to secure universally recognised human rights and freedoms; and to enhance state independence and peaceful relations with other peoples - drawing on the centuries-old traditions of the statehood of the Georgian nation and the historical and legal legacy of the Constitution of Georgia of 1921, proclaim this Constitution before God and the nation.
Along with freedom of belief and religion, the State shall recognise the outstanding role of the Apostolic Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia in the history of Georgia, and its independence from the State. The relationship between the state of Georgia and the Apostolic Autocephalous Orthodox Church of Georgia shall be determined by a constitutional agreement, which shall be in full compliance with the universally recognised principles and norms of international law in the area of human rights and freedoms.
Everyone has the right to the free development of their personality.
The first meeting of the newly elected Parliament shall be held no later than the 10th day after the results of the parliamentary elections have been officially announced. The first meeting of Parliament is called by the President. Parliament shall be authorised to start work at the first meeting if the majority of the total number of the Members of Parliament is present at the meeting. Parliament shall acquire full powers once this is acknowledged by two thirds of the Members of Parliament. The powers of the previous Parliament shall be terminated from this moment.
'I, the President of Georgia, do solemnly affirm before God and the nation that I will support and defend the Constitution of Georgia, the independence, unity and indivisibility of the country; that I will faithfully perform the duties of the President, will care for the security and welfare of the citizens of my country and for the revival and might of my nation and homeland.'
The constitutional bodies shall take all measures within the scope of their competences to ensure the full integration of Georgia into the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
