IN THE NAME OF THE ALMIGHTY GOD
We the People of Ghana,
IN EXERCISE of our natural and inalienable right to establish a framework of government which shall secure for ourselves and posterity the blessings of liberty, equality of opportunity and prosperity;
IN A SPIRIT of friendship and peace with all peoples of the world;
AND IN SOLEMN declaration and affirmation of our commitment to;
Freedom, Justice, Probity and Accountability,
The Principle that all powers of Government spring from the Sovereign Will of the People;
The Principle of Universal Adult Suffrage;
The Rule of Law;
The protection and preservation of Fundamental Human Rights and Freedoms, Unity and Stability for our Nation;
DO HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
is inconsistent with, or is in contravention of a provision of this Constitution, may bring an action in the Supreme Court for a declaration to that effect.
commits the offence of high treason and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to suffer death.
he shall, acting in accordance with the advice of the Council of State, appoint a commission of inquiry to inquire into the demand and to make recommendations on all the factors involved in the creation, alteration or merger.
shall be brought before a court within forty-eight hours after the arrest, restriction or detention.
except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority of that law is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in terms of the spirit of this Constitution.
Administrative bodies and administrative officials shall act fairly and reasonably and comply with the requirements imposed on them by law and persons aggrieved by the exercise of such acts and decisions shall have the right to seek redress before a court or other tribunal.
A person who by reason of sickness or any other cause is unable to give his consent shall not be deprived by any other person of medical treatment, education or any other social or economic benefit by reason only of religious or other beliefs.
In its dealings with other nations, the Government shall-
The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen-
Every citizen of Ghana of eighteen years of age or above and of sound mind has the right to vote and is entitled to be registered as a voter for the purposes of public elections and referenda.
The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions-
Except as provided in this Constitution or in any other law not inconsistent with this Constitution, in the performance of its functions, the Electoral Commission, shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
and the presiding officer shall, there and then, announce the results of the voting at that polling station before communicating them to the returning officer.
The Electoral Commission shall, by constitutional instrument, make regulations for the effective performance of its functions under this Constitution or any other law, and in particular, for the registration of voters, the conduct of public elections and referenda, including provision for voting by proxy.
There shall be in every region and district a representative of the Electoral Commission who shall perform such functions as shall be assigned to him by the Commission.
The appointment of officers and other employees of the Electoral Commission shall be made by the Commission acting in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
The administrative expenses of the Electoral Commission including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect of persons serving with the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
Parliament shall have no power to enact a law to establish or authorise the establishment of a body or movement with the right or power to impose on the people of Ghana a common programme or a set of objectives of a religious or political nature.
The President shall not leave Ghana without prior notification in writing, signed by him and addressed to the Speaker of Parliament.
There shall be a public seal and a presidential seal, the use and custody of which shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be regulated by law.
A person shall not be qualified for election as the President of Ghana unless-
and shall be held at such place and shall begin on such date as the Electoral Commission shall, by constitutional instrument, specify.
shall be Prima facie evidence that the person named was so elected.
The Electoral Commission shall, by constitutional instrument, make regulations for the purpose of giving effect to article 63 of this Constitution.
The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament and before a dissolution of Parliament, deliver to Parliament a message on the state of the nation.
shall be given to the Speaker who shall immediately inform the Chief Justice and deliver the notice to him copied to the President.
being expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund, shall be determined by the President on the recommendations of a committee of not more than five persons appointed by the President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Council of State.
The Government of Ghana shall conduct its international affairs in consonance with the accepted principles of public international law and diplomacy in a manner consistent with the national interest of Ghana.
A Minister of State or Deputy Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance, the oath of Minister of State and the Cabinet oath, as the case may be, set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
The office of a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister shall become vacant if-
The functions of the National Security Council include-
No agency, establishment or other organization concerned with national security shall be established except as provided for under this Constitution.
The Speaker shall preside in Parliament at all sittings and in his absence a Deputy Speaker shall preside.
A quorum of Parliament, apart from the person presiding, shall be one-third of all the members of Parliament.
A person who sits or votes in Parliament knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he is not entitled so to do commits an offence and shall be liable on conviction, to such penalty as shall be prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament.
Parliament shall have no power to pass any law-
Parliament shall not, unless the bill is introduced or the motion is introduced by, or on behalf of, the President-
The Vice-President, or a Minister or Deputy Minister who is not a member of Parliament, shall be entitled to participate in the proceedings of Parliament and shall be accorded all the privileges of a member of Parliament except that he is not entitled to vote or to hold an office in Parliament.
A person who has served as a member of Parliament for any period of time shall, on his death or on his ceasing to be a member of Parliament in any circumstance, other than where he becomes disqualified as a member of Parliament, or where he vacates his office under article 97 (1) (c) or (d), be eligible for the payment to his personal representatives or to him of such gratuity proportionate to his period of service as shall be determined by the President, acting in consultation with the Committee referred to in article 71 of this Constitution.
There shall be freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in Parliament and that freedom shall not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament.
Civil or criminal process coming from any court or place out of Parliament shall not be served on, or executed in relation to, the Speaker or a member or the Clerk to Parliament while he is on his way to, attending at or returning from, any proceedings of Parliament.
Neither the Speaker, nor a member of, nor the Clerk to, Parliament shall be required to serve on a jury in any court or place out of Parliament.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a person shall not be under any civil or criminal liability in respect of the publication of-
An act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions or which obstructs or impedes a member or officer of Parliament in the discharge of his duties, or affronts the dignity of Parliament or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce that result, is contempt of Parliament.
Where an act or omission which constitutes contempt of Parliament is an offence under the criminal law, the exercise by Parliament of the power to punish for contempt shall not be a bar to the institution of proceedings under the criminal law.
The Supreme Court shall have supervisory jurisdiction over all courts and over any adjudicating authority and may, in the exercise of that supervisory jurisdiction, issue orders and directions for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory power.
A single Justice of the Supreme Court may exercise power vested in the Supreme Court not involving the decision of a cause or matter before the Supreme Court, except that-
A single Justice of the Court of Appeal may exercise a power vested in the Court of Appeal, not involving the decision of a cause or matter before the Court of Appeal, except that-
The High Court shall have supervisory jurisdiction over all lower courts and any lower adjudicating authority; and may, in the exercise of that jurisdiction, issue orders and directions for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory powers
those functions shall be performed by the most senior of the Justices of the Supreme Court.
Subject to the provisions of this article, the power to appoint persons to hold or to act in a judicial office shall be vested, subject to the approval of the President, in the Chief Justice acting on the advice of the Judicial Council.
Judicial officers shall receive such salaries, allowances, facilities and privileges and other benefits as the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Council, determine.
There shall be a Judicial Council which shall comprise the following persons
upon retirement under this clause, he shall not hold any private office of profit or emolument whether directly or indirectly.
The Chief Justice may acting in accordance with the advice of the Judicial Council and with the approval of the President, by constitutional instrument, make regulations for the efficient performance of the functions of the Judicial Service and the Judicial Council under this Chapter.
The fees, fines and other moneys paid to the Courts shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires –
"judicial office" means
"judicial officer" means the holder of a judicial office; and
"supervisory jurisdiction" includes jurisdiction to issue writs or orders in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus, prohibition and quo warranto.
All state-owned media shall afford fair opportunities and facilities for the presentation of divergent views and dissenting opinions.
The provisions of articles 162 and 163 of this Constitution are subject to laws that are reasonably required in the interest of national security, public order, public morality and for. the Purpose of protecting the reputations, rights and freedoms of other persons
For the avoidance of doubt, the provisions of this Chapter shall not be taken to limit the enjoyment of any of the fundamental human rights and freedoms guaranteed under Chapter 5 of this Constitution.
The functions of the National Media Commission are-
The Commission shall appoint the chairmen and other members of the governing bodies of public corporations managing the state-owned media in consultation with the President.
Editors of the state-owned media shall be appointed by the governing bodies of the respective corporations in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
The Commission shall appoint the officers and other employees of the Commission in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
The administrative expenses of the National Media Commission, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving with the Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
Except as otherwise provided by this Constitution or by any other law not inconsistent with this Constitution, the National Media Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority in the performance of its functions.
Subject to article 167 of this Constitution, the National Media Commission shall not exercise any control or direction over the professional functions of a person engaged in the production of newspapers or other means of communication.
The public funds of Ghana shall be the Consolidated Fund, the Contingency Fund and such other public funds as may be established by or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
Where it appears to the President that the Appropriation in respect of any financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may, with the prior approval of Parliament by a resolution, authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government in respect of the period expiring three months from the beginning of the financial year or on the coming into operation of the Act whichever is earlier.
submit to the Auditor-General for audit, a statement of its foreign exchange receipts and payments or transfers in and outside Ghana.
There shall be an Audit Service which shall form part of the public services of Ghana.
A member of the public service's shall not be-
A public corporation shall not be established except by Act of Parliament.
The Public Services Commission shall have such powers and exercise such supervisory, regulatory and consultative functions as Parliament shall, by law, prescribe, including as may be applicable, the supervision and regulation of entrance and promotion examinations, recruitment and appointment into or promotions within, the public services, and the establishment of standards and guidelines on the terms and conditions of employment in the public services.
The Public Services Commission may, subject to the approval of the President, make regulations, by constitutional instrument, for the effective and efficient performance of its functions under this Constitution or any other law.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, or any other law not inconsistent with this Constitution, the Public Services Commission shall not be subject to the control or direction of any person or authority in the performance of its functions.
There shall be established a Police Council which shall consist of-
There shall be established a Prisons Service Council which shall consist of-
There shall be established an Armed Forces Council which shall consist of-
The Chief of Defence Staff of the Armed Forces shall, subject to the provisions of this article, and to the control and direction of the Armed Forces Council on matters of policy, be responsible for the administration and the operational control and command of the Armed Forces.
The Armed Forces Council may, subject to such conditions as it may consider fit, delegate some of its functions under this Chapter by directions in writing to a committee or a member of the Council.
There shall be established by Act of Parliament within six months after Parliament first meets after the coming into force of this Constitution, a Commission on Human Rights and Administrative Justice which shall consist of-
The President shall appoint the members of the Commission under article 70 of this Constitution.
The functions of the Commission shall be defined and prescribed by Act of Parliament and shall include the duty-
An Act of Parliament enacted under article 216 of this Constitution shall provide for the creation of regional and district branches of the Commission.
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner for Human Rights and Administrative Justice, unless he is-
The Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners shall not hold any other public office.
Where the Commissioner dies, resigns or is removed from office or is for any other reason unable to perform the functions of his office, the President shall, acting in consultation with the Council of State, appoint a person qualified to be appointed Commissioner to perform those functions until the appointment of a new Commissioner.
Except as provided by this Constitution or by any other law not inconsistent with this Constitution, the Commission and the Commissioners shall, in the performance of their functions, not be subject to the direction or control of an person or authority.
The appointment of officers and other employees of the Commission shall be made by the Commission acting in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
The administrative expenses of the Commission including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect of, persons serving with the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
The procedure for the removal of the Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners shall be the same as that provided for the removal of a Justice of the Court of Appeal and a Justice of the High Court respectively under this Constitution.
For the purposes of performing his functions under this Constitution and any other law, the Commissioner may bring an action before any court in Ghana and may seek any remedy which may be available from that court.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to any Act of Parliament made under this Chapter, the Commission shall make, by constitutional instrument, regulations regarding the manner and procedure for bringing complaints before it and the investigation of such complaints.
There shall be established by Act of Parliament within six months after Parliament first meets after the coming into force of this Constitution, a National Commission for Civic Education in this Chapter referred to as "the Commission".
The functions of the Commission shall be-
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution or in any other law which is not inconsistent with this Constitution, the Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority in the performance of its functions.
The procedure for the removal of the Chairman or a Deputy Chairman from office shall be the same as that provided for the removal of a Justice of the Court of Appeal and a Justice of the High Court respectively under this Constitution.
Parliament shall, by law, provide for the establishment of Regional and District branches of the Commission.
The officers and employees of the Commission shall be appointed by the Commission acting in consultation with the Public Services Commission.
The administrative expenses of the Commission, including salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, or in respect of, persons serving with the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
A District Assembly shall consist of the following members-
Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the functions of District Assemblies which shall include-
Subject to this Constitution, the qualifications for membership of a District Assembly, the procedures of a District Assembly and other local government units lower than a District Assembly that may be created, shall be provided for by law.
Subject to any procedure established by law, the mandate of a member of a District Assembly may be revoked by the electorate or the appointing body.
The Auditor-General shall audit the accounts of the District Assemblies annually and shall submit his reports on the audit to Parliament.
Parliament shall enact laws and take steps necessary for further decentralization of the administrative functions and projects of the Central Government but shall not exercise any control over the District Assemblies that is incompatible with their decentralized status, or otherwise contrary to law.
The Lands Commission shall consist of the following persons appointed by the President under article 70 of this Constitution-
A Regional Lands Commission shall consist of the following persons appointed by the Minister responsible for lands and natural resources-
A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of the Lands Commission or of a Regional Lands, Commission other than the Executive Secretary and the Regional Lands Officer unless he is qualified to be a member of Parliament, except that for the avoidance of doubt, a person shall not be disqualified to be a member under this article by reason only of his being a public officer.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution or in any other law which is not inconsistent with this Constitution, the Lands Commission shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority, in the performance of its functions.
The National House of Chiefs shall-
A person shall not be qualified as a chief if he has been convicted for high treason, treason, high crime or for an offence involving the security of the State, fraud, dishonesty or moral turpitude.
In this Chapter unless the context otherwise requires, "chief" means a person, who, hailing from the appropriate family and lineage, has been validly nominated, elected or selected and enstooled, enskinned or installed as a chief or queen mother in accordance with the relevant customary law and usage.
A witness before a commission of inquiry is entitled to the same immunities and privileges as if he were a witness before the High Court.
A public officer shall not put himself in a position where his personal interest conflicts or is likely to conflict with the performance of the functions of his office.
No person shall be appointed or act as the Chairman of the governing body of a public corporation or authority while he holds a position in the service of that corporation or authority.
In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "public officer" means a person who holds a public office.
A bill for the amendment of this Constitution which has been passed in accordance with this Constitution, shall be assented to by the President only if-
as if the Government were a private person of full age and capacity.
"article" means an article of this Constitution;
"chief" has the meaning assigned to it in article 277 of this Constitution;
"Civil Service" includes service in both central and local governments;
"commission of inquiry" includes a committee of inquiry;
"constitutional instrument" means an instrument made under a power conferred by this Constitution;
"court" means a court of competent jurisdiction established by or under the authority of this Constitution and includes a tribunal;
"Decree" includes a Decree made by the National Liberation Council, the National Redemption Council, the Supreme Military Council or the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council or under its authority and any statutory instrument made under the authority of any such Decree;
"District Assembly" includes a Metropolitan and a Municipal Assembly;
"enactment" means an Act of Parliament, a Decree, a Law or a constitutional instrument or a statutory instrument or any provision of an Act of Parliament, a Decree, a Law or of a constitutional or of a statutory instrument;
"entrenched provision" has the meaning assigned to it in article 290 of this Constitution;
"functions" includes powers and duties;
"government" means any authority by which the executive authority of Ghana is duly exercised;
"high crime" means high crime within the meaning of article 2 of this Constitution;
"high treason" means high treason within the meaning of article 3 of this Constitution;
"judgment" includes a decision, an order or decree of the court;
"meeting" includes a period during which Parliament is meeting continually within a session;
"Minister" means a Minister appointed under article 78 or 256 of this Constitution;
"oath" includes an affirmation;
"oath of allegiance" means the oath of allegiance specified in the Second Schedule to this Constitution;
"paramount chief" means a person who has been nominated, elected and installed as a paramount chief in accordance with customary law and usage;
"public corporation" means a corporation or any other body of persons established by an Act of Parliament or set up out of funds provided by Parliament or other public funds;
"public interest" includes any right or advantage which enures or is intended to enure to the benefit generally of the whole of the people of Ghana;
"public office" includes an office the emoluments attached to which are paid directly from the Consolidated Fund or directly out of moneys provided by Parliament and an office in a public corporation established entirely out of public funds or moneys provided by Parliament;
"public service" includes service in any civil office of Government, the emoluments attached to which are paid directly from the Consolidated Fund or directly out of moneys provided by Parliament and service with a public corporation;
"retiring awards" includes pension and gratuity;
"Rules of Court Committee" means the Rules of Court Committee established by article 157 of this Constitution;
"Service Chiefs" includes Army Chief of Staff, Chief of Naval Staff and Chief of Air Staff;
"session" means a series of meetings of Parliament within a period of twelve months;
"sitting" includes a period during which Parliament is sitting continuously without adjournment and a period during which it is in committee;
"statutory instrument" means an instrument made, whether directly or indirectly, under a power conferred by an Act of Parliament or a Decree or a Law;
"stool" includes a skin, and the person or body of persons having control over skin land;
"stool land" includes any land or interest in, or right over, any land controlled by a stool or skin, the head of a particular community or the captain of a company, for the benefit of the subjects of that Stool or the members of that community or company; and
"treason" means treason as defined in article 19 of this Constitution.
Where in this Constitution or in any other law discretionary power is vested in any person or authority-
In this Constitution and in any other law-
Subject to the provisions of Chapter 25 of this Constitution, where on any matter, whether arising out of this Constitution or otherwise, there is no provision, express or by necessary implication of this Constitution which deals with the matter, that has arisen, Parliament shall, by an Act of Parliament, not being inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution, provide for that matter to be dealt with.
The transitional provisions specified in the First Schedule to this Constitution shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Constitution.
The Public Tribunals Board shall cease to exist within six months after the coming into force of this Constitution and its functions, assets and liabilities are transferred to the Judicial Council.
Parliament shall, within six months after the coming into force of this Constitution-
The first appointments to the following offices shall be made within six months after the assumption of office of the President-
Until Parliament enacts an Act of Parliament in accordance with article 192 of this Constitution for the establishment or operation of a public corporation, a public corporation in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue its operations under the enactment under which it was established.
The office of the Ombudsman in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall, until the President appoints the Commissioner for Human Rights and Administrative Justice and his Deputies, and provision is otherwise made, continue as if it forms part of the Office of the Commission for Human Rights and Administrative Justice.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution to the contrary, all cases pending before the Office of Revenue Commissioners established under the Revenue Commissioners Law, 1984 (PNDCL 80), the National Investigations Committee established under the National Investigations Committee Law, 1982 (PNDCL.2) and the State Houses (Allocation Policy and Implementation) Commission established under the State Houses (Allocation Policy and Implementation) Commission Law, 1984 (PNDCL 83) in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution may be proceeded with and completed by that Commission or Committee, until the submission of its report or until it is otherwise dissolved in accordance with law.
Notwithstanding article 199 of this Constitution, a person is not entitled to receive pension under the Social Security Scheme under the Social Security Law, 1991 (PNDCL 247) before attaining the age of fifty-five years unless Parliament by law otherwise determines.
Where any matter or thing has been commenced before the coming into force of this Constitution by a person or authority that has power for the purpose under the existing law, that matter or thing may be carried on and completed by the person or authority having power for the purpose after the coming into force of this Constitution; and it shall not be necessary for the person or authority to commence the matter or thing afresh.
The Presidential seal, the Public seal, the seals of the Superior Courts as well as any prescribed forms in use under any enactment in force immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue to be used until provision is otherwise made for them.
The prerogative of mercy of the President under article 72 of this Constitution may be exercised in respect of any criminal offence committed before the coming into force of this Constitution as it may in respect of a criminal offence committed thereafter.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the financial estimates in operation for the financial year in being at the coming into force of this Constitution shall, until provision is otherwise made by Act of Parliament, continue and shall have full effect.
All compensations, pensions, gratuities and similar allowances granted in accordance with the provisions of any Constitution or any other law formerly in force in Ghana and which were payable immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, shall, notwithstanding the abrogation or repeal of any such Constitution or law, as the case may be, continue to be payable and are charged on the Consolidated Fund.
Where immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution any existing enactment had not been brought into force or was to come into force on a date subsequent to such coming into force, the enactment may be brought into force in accordance with its terms, or shall come into force upon such subsequent date, as the case may be.
The National House of Chiefs, the Regional Houses of Chiefs, the Traditional Councils and all Judicial Committees of those bodies in existence immediately before the! coming into force of this Constitution shall, on the coming into force of this Constitution, continue in existence subject to this Constitution.
The Oaths Decree, 1972 (NRCD 6), as amended, shall have effect subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
Except where the context otherwise requires and subject to the other provisions of this Part, in all enactments in existence immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution-
In this Constitution, any reference to the Chief of Defence Staff shall be deemed to include any person who holds or held the office of General Officer Commanding.
The First President under this Constitution may, at any time within twelve months after assuming office as President, by constitutional instrument, make such provision as may appear necessary for repealing, modifying, adding to or adapting any law for bringing it into accord with the provisions of this Constitution or otherwise for giving effect to this Constitution.
for the purposes of, or in right of, the Government of Ghana, that person shall, on the coming into force of this Constitution, hold the property or asset subject to the provisions of articles 257 and 258 of this Constitution, on the same trust for the Government of Ghana established under this Constitution.
Subject to section 32 of this Schedule-
Notwithstanding anything in Chapter 25 of this Constitution, Parliament shall have no power to amend this section or sections 34 and 35 of this Schedule.
I,...................................................................................... do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of Ghana; and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such other person as the President may designate.
I,...................................................................................... having been elected to the high office of President of the Republic of Ghana do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful and true to the Republic of Ghana; that I will at all times preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and that I dedicate myself to the service and well-being of the people of the Republic of Ghana and to do right to all manner of persons.
I further (solemnly swear) (solemnly affirm) that should I at any time break this oath of office I shall submit myself to the laws of the Republic of Ghana and suffer the penalty for it. (So help me God).
To be administered by the Chief Justice before Parliament.
I.......................................................................................... having been elected to the office of Vice-President of the Republic of Ghana, do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful and true to the Republic of Ghana; that 1 will at all times preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and I dedicate myself to the service and well-being of the people of the Republic of Ghana and to do right to all manner of persons.
I further (solemnly swear) (solemnly affirm) that should I at any time break this oath of office, I shall submit myself to the laws of the Republic of Ghana and suffer the penalty for it. (So help me God).
To be administered by the Chief Justice before Parliament.
I,.......................................................................................... having been appointed (Chief Justice/a Justice of the Supreme Court/a Justice of the Court of Appeal/a Justice of the High Court of Justice, etc.) do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of the Republic of Ghana; and that I will truly and faithfully perform the functions of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will; and that I will at all times uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Ghana. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such other person as the Chief Justice may designate.
I,.............................................................................................. do (solemnly swear in the name of the Almighty God) (solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully and conscientiously perform my duties as a member of the Council of State and uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President.
I,............................................................................................ having been appointed a member of the Cabinet do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly reveal such matters as shall be debated in the Cabinet and committed to my secrecy; and that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President.
I.............................................................................................. having been appointed Minister of State (Deputy Minister) of the Republic of Ghana, do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will at all times well and truly serve the Republic of Ghana in the office of Minister of State (Deputy Minister); that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that I will, to the best of my judgment, at all times when required, freely give my counsel and advice for the good management of the public affairs of the Republic of Ghana; and that I will not directly or indirectly reveal any matters that shall come to my knowledge in the discharge of my duties and committed to my secrecy as Minister of State (Deputy Minister). (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President.
I,............................................................................................... holding the office of ............................................................... do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall come to my knowledge in the discharge of my official duties except as may be required for the discharge of my official duties or as may be specially permitted by law. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President, the Chief Justice or such other person as the President may designate.
I,............................................................................................ do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that 1 will at all times well and truly serve the Republic of Ghana in the office of ..................................................................... and that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana as by law' established. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President or such other person as the President may designate.
I,............................................................................................. do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that I will uphold the integrity of the Republic of Ghana; that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as Speaker of Parliament; and that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and that I will do right to all manner of persons in accordance with the Constitution of Ghana and the laws and conventions of Parliament without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the Chief Justice.
I,........................................................................................... having been elected a member of Parliament do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana as by law established; that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of a member of Parliament. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the Speaker.
I,......................................................................................... having been appointed Auditor-General of the Republic of Ghana do (in the name of the Almighty God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Ghana; that I will uphold, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana; and that I will truly and faithfully perform the functions of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. (So help me God).
To be sworn before the President, or such other person as the President may designate.
