In the name of the Holy and Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity
The provision of paragraph 6 does not Preclude that the law provides for the mandatory performance of other services, within or outside the armed forces (alternative service), by those having a substantiated conscientious objection to performing armed service or, generally, military duties.
The extradition of aliens prosecuted for their action as freedom-fighters shall be prohibited.
Paragraph 4 does not preclude the prohibition of exit from the country for persons being prosecuted on criminal charges by act of the public prosecutor, or the imposition of measures necessary for the protection of public health or the health of sick persons, as specified by law.
It is prohibited to exceed these maximum limits of detention pending trial, by successively applying this measure to separate acts of the same case.
No person shall be deprived of the judge assigned to him by law against his will.
Judicial committees or extraordinary courts, under any name whatsoever, shall not be constituted.
All persons have the right to be protected from the collection, processing and use, especially by electronic means, of their personal data, as specified by law. The protection of personal data is ensured by an independent authority, which is constituted and operates as specified by law.
Seizure by order of the public prosecutor shall be allowed exceptionally after circulation and in case of:
Matters relating to the mandatory and free of charge transmission of the workings of the Parliament and of its committees, as well as of the electoral campaign messages of the political parties by radio and television, shall be specified by law.
A special law shall define all matters pertaining to student associations and the participation of students therein.
Professors of university level institutions shall not be dismissed prior to the lawful termination of their term of service, except in the cases of the substantive conditions provided by article 88 paragraph 4 and following a decision by a council constituted in its majority of highest judicial functionaries, as specified by law.
The retirement age of professors of university level institutions shall be determined by law; until such law is issued, professors on active service shall retire ipso jure at the end of the academic year at which they have reached the age of sixty-seven.
The establishment of university level institutions by private persons is prohibited.
The State shall make grants to and shall control all types of athletic associations, as specified by law. The use of grants in accordance with the purpose of the associations receiving them shall also be specified by law.
If the court hearing for the final determination of compensation takes place after one year has elapsed from the court hearing for the provisional determination, then, for the determination of the compensation the value at the time of the court hearing for the final determination shall be taken into account. In the decision declaring an expropriation, specific justification must be made of the possibility to cover the compensation expenditure. Provided that the beneficiary consents thereto, the compensation may be also paid in kind, especially in the form of granting ownership over other property or of granting rights over other property.
Prior to payment of the final or provisional compensation, all rights of the owner shall remain intact and occupation of the property shall not be allowed.
In order for works of a general importance for the economy of the country to be carried out, it is possible that, by special decision of the court which is competent for the final or the provisional determination of the compensation, the execution of works even prior to the determination and payment of the compensation is allowed, provided that a reasonable part of the compensation is paid and that full guarantee is provided in favour of the beneficiary of the compensation, as provided by law. The second period of the first section applies accordingly also to these cases.
Compensation in the amount determined by the court must in all cases be paid within one and one half years at the latest from the date of publication of the decision regarding provisional determination of compensation payable, and in cases of a direct request for the final determination of compensation, from the date of publication of the court ruling, otherwise the expropriation shall be revoked ipso jure.
The compensation as such is exempt from any taxes, deductions or fees.
Measures imposed in accordance with this paragraph shall be lifted as soon as the special reasons that necessitated them cease to exist. In case of undue prolongation of the measures, the Supreme Administrative Court shall decide on their revocation, by categories of cases, upon recourse by any person having a legitimate interest.
All workers, irrespective of sex or other distinctions, shall be entitled to equal pay for work of equal value.
Special laws shall determine the requisition of personal services in case of war or mobilization or to face defence needs of the country or urgent social emergencies resulting from disasters or liable to endanger public health, as well as the contribution of personal work to local government agencies to satisfy local needs.
The general working conditions include the definition of the manner of collection and the agent obliged to collect and return to trade unions membership fees specified in their respective by-laws.
Strikes of any nature whatsoever are prohibited in the case of judicial functionaries and those serving in the security corps. The right to strike shall be subject to the specific limitations of the law regulating this right in the case of public servants and employees of local government agencies and of public law legal persons as well as in the case of the employees of all types of enterprises of a public nature or of public benefit, the operation of which is of vital importance in serving the basic needs of the society as a whole. These limitations may not be carried to the point of abolishing the right to strike or hindering the lawful exercise thereof.
The relevant technical choices and considerations are conducted according to the rules of science. The compilation of a national cadastre constitutes an obligation of the State.
By forest or forest ecosystem is meant the organic whole of wild plants with woody trunk on the necessary area of ground which, together with the flora and fauna co-existing there, constitute, by means of their mutual interdependence and interaction, a particular biocoenosis (forest biocoenosis) and a particular natural environment (forest-derived). A forest expanse exists when the wild woody vegetation, either high or shrubbery, is sparse.
'Article 28' constitutes the foundation for the participation of the Country in the European integration process.
Citizens who have not yet acquired the right to vote may participate in youth sections of parties.
The President of the Republic shall regulate the function of the institutions of the Republic. He shall be elected by Parliament for a term of five years, as specified in articles 32 and 33.
President of the Republic may be elected a person who is a Greek citizen for at least five years, is of Greek descent from the father's or mother's line, has attained the age of forty and has the capacity to vote.
In case of permanent incapacity of the President of the Republic to discharge his duties, as specified in paragraph 2 of article 34, as well as in case of his resignation, demise, or removal from office in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution, the sitting of Parliament in order to elect a new President is called within ten days at the latest from the premature termination of the tenure of office by the previous President.
Should the said majority not be attained, the ballot shall be repeated after five days.
Should the second ballot fail to produce the required majority, the ballot shall once more be repeated after five days; the person receiving a three-fifths majority of the total number of Members of Parliament shall be elected President of the Republic.
As soon as the Parliament thus elected shall have constituted itself as a body, it shall proceed through vote by roll call to elect the president of the Republic by a three-fifths majority of the total number of Members of Parliament.
Should the said majority not be attained, the ballot shall be repeated within five days and the person receiving an absolute majority of the votes of the total number of Members of Parliament shall be elected President of the Republic. Should this majority also not be attained, the ballot shall once more be repeated after five days between the two persons with the highest number of votes, and the person receiving a relative majority shall be deemed elected President of the Republic.
If the Parliament has been dissolved in any way whatsoever, the election of the President of the Republic shall be postponed until the new Parliament shall have constituted itself as a body and within twenty days at the latest thereof, as specified in paragraphs 3 and 4 and in adherence with the provisions of paragraph I of article 34.
A President of the Republic who has resigned prior to the expiration of his tenure may not be a candidate in the elections resulting from his resignation.
"I do swear in the name of the Holy and Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity to safeguard the Constitution and the laws, to care for the faithful observance thereof, to defend the national independence and territorial integrity of the Country, to protect the rights and liberties of the Greeks and to serve the general interest and the progress of the Greek People".
During the term of replacement of the President, the provisions concerning the dissolution of Parliament, except in the case specified in article 32 paragraph 4, as well as the provisions relating to the dismissal of the Cabinet and recourse to a referendum as specified in article 38 paragraph 2 and article 44 paragraph 2, shall not be applicable.
If the Cabinet has been relieved of its duties as provided by article 38 paragraph 1, and the Prime Minister fails to countersign the relative decree, this shall be signed by the President of the Republic alone.
As far as exploratory mandates are concerned, when parties have an equal number of seats in Parliament, the one having acquired more votes at the elections, precedes the other. A recently formed party with a parliamentary group, as provided by the Standing Orders of Parliament, follows an older one with an equal number of seats. In both these instances, exploratory mandates cannot be given to more than four parties.
If the Prime Minister of the resigned Cabinet is also the leader or party spokesman of the party with an absolute majority of the total number of Members in Parliament, then the provision of article 37 paragraph 3, section c is analogously applied.
The inability of the Prime Minister to discharge his duties due to reasons of health is ascertained by the Parliament by virtue of a special decision, taken with the absolute majority of the total number of Members of Parliament, following a proposal by the parliamentary group of the party to which the Prime Minister belongs, provided that this has the absolute majority of the seats in Parliament. In every other case, the proposal is submitted by at least two fifths of the total number of Members of Parliament.
Until the appointment of the new Prime Minister, the duties of the Prime Minister are exercised by the first in order Deputy Prime Minister and, in case no Deputy Prime Ministers have been appointed, by the first in order Minister.
The provision of paragraph 2 is also applied in the case of replacement of the President of the Republic, as provided in article 34.
[Repealed]
In all cases and without any exception, the decree concerning the dissolution of Parliament must contain a proclamation of elections to be held within thirty days and the convocation of the new Parliament within thirty days of the elections.
A referendum on Bills passed by Parliament regulating important social matters, with the exception of the fiscal ones shall be proclaimed by decree by the President of the Republic, if this is decided by three-fifths of the total number of its members, following a proposal of two-fifths of the total number of its members, and as the Standing Orders and the law for the application of the present paragraph provide. No more than two proposals to hold a referendum on a Bill can be introduced in the same parliamentary term.
Should a Bill be voted, the time-limit stated in article 42 paragraph I begins the day the referendum is held.
The President of the Republic is the commander in chief of the Nation's Armed Forces, the command of which shall be exercised by the Government, as specified by law. The President shall also confer ranks on those serving therein, as specified by law.
The resolution of Parliament determines the duration of the effect of the imposed measures, which cannot exceed fifteen days.
The President of the Republic shall have no powers other than those explicitly conferred upon him by the Constitution and the laws concurrent herewith.
The free and unfalsified expression of the popular will as an expression of popular sovereignty, shall be guaranteed by all State officers, who shall be obliged to ensure such under all circumstances. Criminal sanctions for violations of this provision shall be specified by law.
The results of the census are considered to have been published on the basis of the data of the competent service, after one year has elapsed from the last day on which the census was conducted.
Persons nominated for State Deputies shall not be subject to the restrictions of this paragraph.
For the purposes of the application of this paragraph, local government agencies, other public law legal persons, state-owned private law legal persons, public enterprises, enterprises of local government agencies and other enterprises of local government agencies and other enterprises whose management the state appoints directly or indirectly by administrative act or by virtue of its capacity as shareholder, are equated to the State. A shareholder of an enterprise falling within the restrictions of this paragraph is every person possessing a percentage of more than one percent of its share capital.
By special law professional activities may be determined, beyond those mentioned in the previous sections, whose exercise is not permitted to Members of Parliament.
Violation of the provisions of the present paragraph shall result in the forfeiture from parliamentary office and in the nullity of the related contracts or acts, as specified by law.
The hearing of objections raised against the validity of parliamentary elections and their verification concerning either electoral violations related to the conduct of the elections, or the lack of legal qualifications, is assigned to the Supreme Special Court of article 100.
"I swear in the name of the Holy Consubstantial and Indivisible Trinity to keep faith in my Country and in the democratic form of government, obedience to the Constitution and the laws and to discharge conscientiously my duties".
This paragraph shall be applicable as of the next parliamentary session.
During the parliamentary term the Members of Parliament shall not be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or otherwise confined without prior leave granted by Parliament. Likewise, a member of a dissolved Parliament shall not be prosecuted for political crimes during the period between the dissolution of Parliament and the declaration of the election of the members of the new Parliament.
Leave shall be deemed not granted if Parliament does not decide within three months of the date the request for prosecution by the public prosecutor was transmitted to the Speaker.
The three month limit is suspended during the Parliament's recess.
No leave is required when Members of Parliament are caught in the act of committing a felony.
A regular session is compulsorily extended until the budget is authorized in accordance with article 79 or until the special law provided in the same article is passed.
On a recommendation by fifty Members the Parliament may reprimand the Speaker or a member of the Presidium thus causing the termination of his tenure.
Parliament cannot resolve without an absolute majority of the members present, which in no case may be less than one-fourth of the total number of the Members of Parliament.
In the case of a tie vote, the vote shall be repeated; in the case of a second tie the proposal shall be rejected.
A parliamentary resolution adopted by an absolute majority of the total number of members shall be required in order to set up investigation committees on matters related to foreign policy and national defence.
Details pertaining to the composition and operation of such committees shall be provided by the Standing Orders.
No person shall appear at his own initiative before the Parliament to make an oral or written report. Reports shall be presented through a member or shall be handed over to the Speaker. Parliament shall have the right to forward any reports addressed thereto to the Ministers and Undersecretaries who shall be obliged to offer explanations when so requested.
When Parliament is in recess, its legislative business, with the exception of statutes belonging to the competence of the Plenum as specified in Article 72, shall be conducted by a Section of Parliament, established and operating as specified in article 68 paragraph 3 and article 70.
The Standing Orders may provide for the examination of Bills by a Parliamentary Committee composed of members of the same Section.
The Parliament in Plenum shall also vote the budget and the financial statement of the State and of Parliament.
At least one week must intervene between submission of a Bill or law proposal and its debate in the standing parliamentary committee.
A Bill or law proposal containing provisions not related to its main subject matter shall not be introduced for debate.
No addition or amendment shall be introduced for debate if it is not related to the main subject matter of the Bill or law proposal.
Additions or amendments by Ministers are debated only if they have been submitted at least three days prior to the commencement of the debate in the Plenum, to the Section specified in article 71 or to the competent standing parliamentary committee, as specified by the Standing Orders.
The provisions of the two preceding sections shall also apply for additions or amendments submitted by Members of Parliament.
Parliament shall resolve in case of contestation.
Members of Parliament not participating in the competent standing parliamentary committee or the Section specified in article 71, are entitled to take the floor during the debate in principle and in order to support law proposals and additions or amendments that they have submitted, as provided by the Standing Orders.
This prohibition does not preclude the determination by law of the manner of assessing the share of the State or public agencies in general in the automatic increase on value of private real estate property adjoining the site of construction of public works and resulting exclusively therefrom.
During the discussion of the draft envisaged in par. 3, the parliament may submit proposals for the modification of individual items of the budget which are introduced to the Plenum and are voted upon, provided that the modifications have no impact over the total expenditures and revenues of the State. The Standing orders shall provide the specific process for the monitoring of the execution of the State budget by the Parliament.
Paragraph 2 does not impede the participation of Greece in the process of the Economic and Monetary Union, in the wider framework of European integration, according to the provisions of article 28.
A statute shall regulate the status of Deputy Ministers, Ministers without portfolio and Undersecretaries who may be members of the Cabinet, as well as the status of permanent Undersecretaries.
A motion of censure must be signed by at least one-sixth of the number of Members of Parliament and must explicitly state the subjects on which the debate is to be held.
A motion of censure shall be adopted only if it is approved by an absolute majority of the total number of Members of Parliament.
The members of the Cabinet and the Undersecretaries shall be collectively responsible for general Government policy, and each of them severally for the actions or omissions within his powers, according to the provisions of statutes on the liability of Ministers. A written or oral order of the President of the Republic may in no case whatsoever relieve Ministers and Undersecretaries of their liability.
If in the course of another investigation, preliminary investigation, preliminary examination or administrative inquiry, evidence should arise which relates to the persons and offences of the preceding paragraph, these shall be promptly forwarded to Parliament by the person conducting the investigation, preliminary examination or inquiry.
The Parliament may exercise its competence pursuant to paragraph I until the end of the second regular session of the parliamentary term commencing after the offence was committed.
The Parliament may at any time revoke its resolution or suspend the prosecution, preliminary proceedings or main proceedings, according to the procedure and majority provided in the first section of this paragraph.
The regular and alternate members of the Special Court are chosen by lot, after the prosecution has taken place, by the Speaker of the Parliament in a public sitting of the Parliament, from among those members of the two high ranking courts who were appointed or promoted to the rank they hold prior to the submission of the motion for prosecution. The Special Court is chaired by the highest ranking of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court members chosen by lot and, in case of equal in the rank members, by the first one in order of seniority.
A Judicial Council, composed for each case by two members of the Supreme Administrative Court and three members of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court, functions in the framework of the Special Court of this paragraph. The members of the Judicial Council may not be members of the Special Court at the same time. Following a ruling of the Judicial Council, one of its members who belong to the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court is appointed as examining magistrate. The preliminary proceedings are concluded with the issue of an ordinance.
The duties of public prosecutor in the Special Court and in the Judicial Council of this paragraph are exercised by a member of the Public Prosecutor's Office of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court who is chosen by lot together with his alternate. The second and third sections of this paragraph also apply for the members of the Judicial Council, while the second section also applies for the public prosecutor. In the case of impeachment before the Special Court of a serving or former member of the Cabinet or Undersecretary, any participants are also jointly indicted, as specified by law.
Notwithstanding articles 94, 95 and 98, disputes concerning all kinds of remunerations and pensions of magistrates, and provided that the resolution of the relevant legal issues may affect the salary, pension or fiscal status of a wider circle of persons, shall be tried by the special court of article 99. In such cases, the composition of the court includes the participation of one additional full professor and one additional barrister, as specified by law. Matters relating to the continuation of pending processes before the courts shall be specified by law.
In the true sense of article 88, the unification of the jurisdiction of first instance of civil courts and the regulation of the service status of magistrates of this instance is permitted, provided that a procedure for judgement and evaluation is provided for, as specified by law.
The conduct of arbitrations by magistrates is allowed only in the framework of their official duties, as specified by law.
In the supreme judicial council shall also participate, without right to vote, two magistrates of the branch concerned by the changes in the service status, who must be at least of the rank of Judge of Appeals or of an equivalent one, and are chosen by lot, as specified by law.
The tenure of the President of the Supreme Administrative Court, of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court and of the Court of Audit, as well as of the Public Prosecutor of the Supreme Civil and Criminal Court and of the General Commissioners of administrative courts and of the Court of Audit may not exceed four years, even if the magistrate holding this office has not reached the retirement age. Any period of time which remains until completion of the retirement age, shall be calculated as actual pensionable service, as specified by law.
Disciplinary action shall be initiated by the Minister of Justice.
In case of violation of the preceding section, law shall specify the ensuing legal consequences as well as the imposed sanctions. Publication of the dissenting opinion shall be compulsory. Law shall specify matters concerning the entry of any dissenting opinion into the minutes as well as the conditions and prerequisites for the publicity thereof.
In both cases judgments shall be subject to appeal before the competent ordinary court; such appeal shall suspend the execution of the judgment.
Other felonies may be transferred to the jurisdiction of the same courts of appeal by statute.
The provisions of article 93 paragraphs 2 and 3 shall not be applicable in the cases specified in (a) through (d) of the preceding paragraph.
In the cases specified under sections (d) and (e) of the preceding paragraph, the composition of the Court shall be expanded to include two law professors of the law schools of the country's universities, chosen by lot.
Provisions of a statute declared unconstitutional shall be invalid as of the date of publication of the respective judgment, or as of the date specified by the ruling.
Matters relating to the establishment and functioning of the Legal Council of the State, as well as matters relating to the service status of functionaries and servants who serve therein, shall be specified by law. The competence of the Legal Council of the State pertains mainly to the judicial support and representation of the State and to the recognition of claims against it or to the settlement of disputes with the State. The provisions of article 88 paragraphs 2 and 5, and of article 90 paragraph 5, shall apply accordingly to the main staff of the Legal Council of the State.
Recourse against the decisions of these councils may be sought before the Supreme Administrative Court, as specified by law.
The law may provide for special selection procedures that are subject to increased guarantees of transparency and meritocracy, or for special procedures for personnel selection to posts whose activities are subject to special constitutional guarantees or are similar to a mandate.
The law shall likewise determine the judicial power exercised by the monastic authorities and the Holy Community, as well as the customs and taxation privileges of Aghion Oros.
The value specified in paragraph 4 does not include such value as is due to the monopolistic nature of the enterprise.
The same legal force is enjoyed by the provisions of Chapters A through D of Section A of Statute 27/1975 "on the taxation of ships, compulsory contributions for the development of the merchant marine, establishment of foreign shipping companies and regulation of related matters".
The Standing Orders of Parliament, the parliamentary resolutions pertaining thereto and the statutes specifying the manner in which Parliament shall function, shall continue to be in force pending the date of enactment of the new Standing Orders, with the exception of those which are contrary to the provisions of this Constitution.
As to the function of the Sections of Parliament provided by articles 70 and 71 of the Constitution, the provisions of the last Standing Orders regulating the work of the Special Legislative Committee of article 35 of the Constitution of January 1, 1952 shall apply in a supplementary manner, as provided by article 3 of parliamentary resolution A' dated December 14, 1974. Pending the enactment of the new Standing Orders the Committee of article 71 of the Constitution shall be composed of sixty regular members and thirty alternate, to be selected by the Speaker from among all parties and groups, in proportion to their strength. In case of dispute, prior to the publication of the new Standing Orders, on the provisions to be applied, the Plenum or the Section of Parliament in the operation of which the question has arisen shall decide.
The President to be elected shall assume the discharge of his duties upon being sworn in, within five days of his election at the latest.
The statute specified in article 49 paragraph 5 on the regulation of matters related to the liabilities of the President of the Republic must be promulgated before December 31, 1975.
Pending the enactment of the statute specified in article 33 paragraph 3, matters defined therein shall be regulated by the provisions pertaining to the provisional President of the Republic.
The Highest Disciplinary Council shall decide whether the conditions of promotion have reduced the prestige and the special position in the service of the promoted person and shall by final decision rule on re-acquisition or not of the automatically forfeited rank and the rights attached thereto, the retroactive payment of salary or pension being however excluded.
The decision must be pronounced within three months of committal.
The closest living relatives of a magistrates having been demoted and deceased, may exercise all the rights accorded to persons under disciplinary trial before the Highest Disciplinary Council.
