Whereas the people of Grenada
Now, therefore, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Grenada:-
Whereas every person in Grenada is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely-
the provisions of the Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in these provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any person does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought without undue delay before a court.
Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph (a) of this subsection the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the interest in or right over the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof if shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence:
Provided that, in such circumstances as may be prescribed by law, the trial may take place in the absence of the person charged so long as no punishment of death or imprisonment (other than imprisonment in default of payment of a fine) is awarded in the event of his conviction.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Nothing contained in or done under the authority of a law enacted by Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of section 3 or section 13 of this Constitution to the extent that the law authorises the taking during any period of public emergency of measures that are reasonably justifiable for dealing with the situation that exists in Grenada during that period.
Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not exceeding six months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a resolution of that House.
“court” means any court of law having jurisdiction in Grenada other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in council and in sections 2 and 4 of this Constitution a court established by a disciplinary law;
“disciplinary law” means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
“disciplined force” means-
“legal representative” means a person entitled to be in or to enter Grenada and entitled to practise as a barrister in Grenada or, except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, entitled to practise as a solicitor in Grenada;
“member”, in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
There shall be a Governor-General of Grenada who shall be appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty’s pleasure and who shall Her Majesty’s representative in Grenada.
A person appointed to hold the office of Governor-General shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of office.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Grenada to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into by any court of law.
There shall be a Parliament of Grenada which shall consist of Her Majesty, a Senate and a House of Representatives.
Subject to the provisions of section of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be appointed as a Senator if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he-
Provided that the President of the Senate may, at the request of the Senator, from time to time, extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate.
Provided that the President shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a Senator on a dissolution of Parliament until the Senate first meets after that dissolution;
Subject to the provisions of section 31 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House of Representatives if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he-
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member, from time to time, extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
Provided that a person who is not a member of the House of Representatives shall not be elected as Speaker if-
Provided that the offices of Clerk to the Senate and Clerk to the House of Representatives may be held by the same person.
and, if it is made by a person other than the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General may intervene and may then appear or be represented in the proceedings.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of Grenada.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of a bill such as is referred to in section 39(2) of this Constitution a Speaker or other member presiding in the House of Representatives who is an elected member of the House shall have an original vote but no casting vote.
Provided that-
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
Provided that-
For the purpose of the election of members of the House of Representatives, Grenada shall be divided into such number of constituencies having such boundaries as may be provided for by an Order made by the Governor-General in accordance with the provisions of section 56 of this Constitution.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may, by directions in writing, assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister responsibility for any business of the Government of Grenada, including the administration of any department of government.
The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the government of Grenada and shall furnish the Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter relating to the government of Grenada.
Provided that, if occasion arises for making appointments while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Senator or a member of the House of Representatives immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary.
A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and the oath of office.
Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department; and, subject to such direction and control, every department of government shall be under the supervision of a public officer whose office is referred to in this Constitution as the office of a permanent secretary:
Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any other law, the Governor-General may constitute offices for Grenada, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public prosecutions by subsection (2) (c) of this section shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.
Provided that his seat shall become vacant-
All revenues or other moneys raised or received by Grenada (not being revenues or other moneys that are payable, by or under any law for the time being in force in Grenada, into some other fund established for any specific purpose) shall be paid into and form a Consolidated Fund.
a supplementary estimate, showing the sums required or spent, shall be laid before the House of Representatives and, when the supplementary estimate has been approved by the House, a supplementary Appropriation bill shall be introduced in the house providing for the issue of such sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the purposes specified therein.
Parliament may make provision under which, if the Appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister for the time being responsible for finance may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government of Grenada until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the law, whichever is the earlier.
Provided, however, that no appointment shall be made under this subsection unless the body consulted has been in agreement thereto.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that-
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Audit, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that before the Public Service Commission tenders advice to the Governor-General with respect to the appointment of any person to hold the office of Chief of Police the Commission shall consult with the Prime Minister and if the Prime Minister signifies his objection to the appointment of any person to the office the Commission shall not advise the Governor-General to appoint that person.
the Public Service Commission may, by order published in the Official Gazette, specify some rank (other than the rank of Sergeant) in the Police Force or, as the case may be, in that other police force as being equivalent to the rank of Sergeant as it exists in the Royal Grenada Police Force under the law in force immediately before the coming into operation of this Constitution and the references in subsections (2) and (3) of this section to the rank of Sergeant shall then be construed as if they were, in relation to the Royal Grenada Police Force or, as the case may be, in relation to that other police force, references to the rank for the time being so specified.
Provided that Parliament or (in the case of the exercise of a power under subsection (4) of section 89 of this Constitution) the Chief of Police may require appeals to be made to the Chief of Police before they are made to the Public Service Board of Appeal.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as preventing-
shall become a citizen of Grenada on 7th February 1974.
but whose marriage has been terminated by death or dissolution before that date shall be entitled, upon making application and if he is a British protected person or an alien taking the oath of allegiance, to be registered as a citizen of Grenada.
Every person born in Grenada on or after 7th February 1974 shall become a citizen of Grenada at the date of his birth:
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen of Grenada by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth-
A person born outside Grenada on or after 7th February 1974 shall become a citizen of Grenada at the date of his birth if, at that date, his father or his mother is a citizen of Grenada otherwise than by virtue of this section or section 94(3) of this Constitution.
Any person who is married to a citizen of Grenada or who has been married to a person who was, during the subsistence of the marriage, a citizen of Grenada shall be entitled, upon making application in such manner as may be prescribed by or under a law enacted by Parliament, and if he is a British protected person or an alien taking the oath of allegiance, to be registered as a citizen of Grenada.
“British protected person” means a person who is a British protected person for the purpose of the British Nationality Act 1948 or any Act of the United Kingdom Parliament amending or replacing that Act.
Subject to the provisions of section 37(7) of this Constitution, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases-
In this Chapter reference to this Constitution shall be construed as including reference to the Courts Order, which, subject to any provision made by Parliament under section 39 of this Constitution, shall continue to have effect as part of the law of Grenada and for that purpose-
This Constitution is the supreme law of Grenada and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
Where by this Constitution the Governor-General is required to perform any function in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet, the Prime Minister or any other Minister or the Leader of the Opposition, the question whether the Governor-General has received or acted in accordance with such advice shall not be enquired into in any court of law.
Provided that-
“dollars” means dollars in the currency of Grenada;
“financial year” means any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date as Parliament may prescribe;
“Gazette” means any Gazette published by order of the Government of Grenada;
“law” includes any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law and “lawful” and “lawfully” shall be construed accordingly;
“Parliament” means the Parliament of Grenada;
“oath” includes affirmation;
“oath of allegiance” means the oath of allegiance set out in Schedule 3 to this Constitution;
“oath of office” means, in relation to any office, the oath for the due execution of that office set out in Schedule 3 to this Constitution;
“the Police Force” means the Royal Grenada Police Force established by the Police Ordinance and includes any other police force established by or under a law enacted by Parliament to succeed to the functions of the Royal Grenada Police Force;
“public office” means any office of emolument in the public service;
“public officer” means a person holding or acting in any public office;
“the public service” means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the government of Grenada;
“session” means the period beginning when a House of Parliament first meets after the commencement of this Constitution or after Parliament has at any time been prorogued or dissolved and ending when Parliament is prorogued or when Parliament is dissolved without having been prorogued;
“sitting” means, in relation to a House of Parliament, the Period during which the House is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee.
Provided that-
All constituencies shall contain as nearly equal numbers of inhabitants as appears to the Constituency Boundaries Commission to be reasonably practicable, but the Commission may depart from this rule to such extent as it considers expedient to take account of the following factors, that is to say:-
I, …………………………., do swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will faithfully bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors, according to law.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation.]
I, …………………………., do swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will faithfully execute the office of ……………………………. Without fear or favour, affection or ill-will and that in the execution of the functions of that office I will honour, uphold and preserve the Constitution of Grenada.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation.]
