The Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC), founded on September 19th, 1956, has accomplished in an exemplary manner its Minimum Plan [Programa Minimo], which consisted in the liberation of the people of Guinea and Cape Verde, winning the sovereignty of the respective States and, at the same time, launching the foundations for the construction of a free, democratic and socially just nation in each country.
After independence, the Party garnered sympathy, respect and admiration, in both national and international spheres, for the way in which it has conducted the destiny of the Guinean Nation, notably through the creation and institutional development of the State apparatus.
With the Movimento Reajustador of November 14th, the Party has reoriented its actions, correcting the mistakes that were hindering the edification of a united, strong and democratic society.
By adopting the current Constitution, which follows faithfully the thread of institutional evolution that has always reflected the ideas and choices of our people - a policy reaffirmed by the profound transformation being brought about in our society by legality, by right and by the enjoyment of fundamental liberties - the National Popular Assembly of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau reveals that everything it articulates is imbued with the humanism that has always inspired us and that is reflected in our rights and liberties as herein guaranteed to the citizens, as an irreversible victory for our people.
The Popular National Assembly congratulates the PAIGC for the vanguard role it has always performed in conducting the fates of the Guinea nation, and congratulates itself for the courageous and timely decision that the Party of Amilcar Cabral took by overcoming the challenge of democratic opening, towards the construction of a plural, just and free society.
The decision of the PAIGC follows in accordance with its historic tradition of acting at every moment as the repository for the deepest aspirations of our people.
Therefore, acting as a faithful interpreter of the will of the people and exercising its responsibilities as the highest sovereign organ, the National Popular Assembly approves and adopts this Constitution of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau as Fundamental Law, which shall enter into force on May 16th, 1984.
Guinea-Bissau is a sovereign, democratic, secular and unitary republic.
The Republic of Guinea-Bissau is a State with a constitutionally established democracy, founded on national unity and on the effective participation of the people in the development, monitoring and guidance of public activities, and oriented towards the construction of a free and just society.
In the framework of its unitary structure and in the development of national interest, the State of Guinea-Bissau promotes the creation and supports all actions from decentralized territorial collective bodies that have been granted autonomy by the law.
Within its exclusive economic zone, defined by law, the State of Guinea-Bissau holds exclusive competence to maintain and explore natural resources, living or non-living.
The State recognizes the right to inheritance, according to the law.
Public health’s main goal is to promote the physical and mental well-being of the population and the balanced insertion in the social-ecological environment where they live. It must orient itself towards prevention, and must aim for the progressive socialization of medicine and medical-pharmaceutical sectors.
It is a Fundamental duty of the State to preserve, through all means, the conquests of the people and, in particular, the constitutionally established democratic order. The defense of the Nation shall be organized based on active participation and the active support of the population.
The Capital of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau is Bissau.
All citizens are equal before the law, enjoy the same rights and are subjected to the same duties, without distinction of race, sex, social status, social, intellectual or cultural level, religious belief or philosophical conviction.
Men and women are equal before the law in all aspects of political, economic, social and cultural life.
All citizens have the right of access to judicial bodies to seek redress for violations of their constitutionally or legally recognized rights, and justice cannot be denied on the lack of economic means.
The State and all other public entities are civilly responsible, in solidarity with the heads of their bodies, employees or agents, for actions or omission that took place while on duty, and because of its obligations, that may result in a violation of rights, liberties or guarantees, or loss to a third party.
All have the right to information and legal protection, in accordance with the law.
No rights and liberties assured to citizens may be exercised against the independence of the nation, the integrity of the national territory, national unity, the institutions of the Republic nor the principles and objectives established by this Constitution.
All citizens have the right to freedom of movement in all parts of the national territory.
Political parties have the right to airtime on the radio and television in accordance with the law.
In accordance with national development, the State will progressively create the conditions required for the full accomplishment of the economic and social rights established by this Part II.
The electoral system, the conditions of eligibility, the division of the territory into constituencies, the number of deputies, as well as the process and the bodies that monitor electoral matters will be defined by the Electoral Law.
The holders of political positions are liable in civil, political and criminal terms for all actions and omissions in the performance of their duty.
The Presidency of the Republic is not compatible with any other functions, public or private.
The elected President of the Republic will be invested at a plenary session of the Popular National Assembly, by the respective President, and will take in this act the following oath: “I swear by my honor to defend the Constitution and the laws, the national independence and unity, to dedicate my intelligence and my energies to the service of Guinea-Bissau’s people, fulfilling with absolute fidelity the duties of the high position I have been elected to”.
Are exclusive roles of the President of the Republic:
The President of the Republic may enact presidential decrees while performing his duties.
The Council of State is the political body of consultation for the President of the Republic.
The Council of State is responsible for:
The National Popular Assembly is the supreme legislative and political overseer, representing all Guinean citizens. It decides on all fundamental matters of internal and external policies.
All members of the National Popular Assembly are elected by electoral districts defined by law, by means of a free, equal, direct, secret and periodic universal suffrage.
Each Congress will last for four years, beginning with the confirmation of the electoral results.
The Congressmen of the National Popular Assembly must take the following oath: “I swear I will do everything in my power to fulfill, with total honor and fidelity to the people, my term as a Congressman, always intransigently defending the national interests and the principles and objectives established by the Constitution of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau”.
A Congressman has the right to present enquiries to the Government, orally or in writing, and must be presented with an answer in the session or within a delay of 15 days, in writing, if further investigations are needed.
The National Popular Assembly has exclusive competence to legislate on:
The Popular National Assembly has exclusive competence to legislate on the following matters, except in case of authorization granted to the government:
The National Popular Assembly may create topical committees as well as establish temporary committees to deal with specific topics.
Government members may join and speak at sessions of the National Popular Assembly, according to the by-laws.
Ministers and Secretaries of State must take the following oath when taking office: “I swear by my honor to dedicate my intelligence and my energy to the service of the people, performing my duties (of Minister or Secretary of State) to which I have been nominated in the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau with total fidelity to the Constitution and the laws”.
The Government, gathered in the Council of Ministers, may legislate by means of legal-decrees and decrees.
The Government is politically accountable to the President of the Republic and before the National Popular Assembly.
The duties and organization of local authorities, as well as the competencies of its bodies, shall be regulated by law, in accordance with the principle of autonomy of local government.
The representative bodies of local authorities are:
The Electoral Law will determine the form of eligibility of all the members of the local authority’s bodies, their composition, as well as the functioning, the duration of the term and the form of their acts.
The National Popular Assembly is responsible for dissolving local authority bodies, after consulting with the Government, in case it finds acts or omissions contrary to the law.
The National Popular Assembly has the power to create or dissolve local authorities, as well as to modify their areas, and these changes may be preceded by consultations of the bodies of the affected authorities.
The local authorities participate, in their own right and in accordance with law, to the revenues from direct taxes.
Tribunals are sovereign bodies with competence to administer justice on behalf of the people.
The law may create tribunals to resolve social disputes, whether civil or criminal.
The law will regulate the organization, competence and functioning of the bodies responsible for administering justice.
The revision bills will have to be approved by a majority of two thirds of the Congressmen that constitute the assembly.
No draft revision may affect:
No draft or proposed revision may be presented, debated or voted when martial law or state of emergency is in place.
The members of the security forces, on duty, currently congressmen of the National Popular Assembly will continue to hold office until the next legislative elections.
The State bodies established by the Constitution of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau of May 16th, 1984, shall remain in office until the taking of office of the members of the sovereign bodies that have been selected by the respective electoral processes.
