Whereas independence is the inalienable right of all nations, therefore, all colonialism must be abolished in this world as it is not in conformity with humanity and justice;
And the moment of rejoicing has arrived in the struggle of the Indonesian independence movement to guide the people safely and well to the gate of the independence of the state of Indonesia which shall be independent, united, sovereign, just and prosperous;
By the grace of God Almighty and motivated by the noble desire to live a free national life, the people of Indonesia hereby declare their independence.
Subsequent thereto, to form a government of the state of Indonesia which shall protect all the people of Indonesia and all the independence and the land that has been struggled for, and to improve public welfare, to educate the life of the people and to participate toward the establishment of a world order based on freedom, perpetual peace and social justice, therefore the independence of Indonesia shall be formulated into a constitution of the Republic of Indonesia which shall be built into a sovereign state based on a belief in the One and Only God, just and civilised humanity, the unity of Indonesia, and democratic life led by wisdom of thoughts in deliberation amongst representatives of the people, and achieving social justice for all the people of Indonesia.
The President and Vice President shall hold office for a term of five years and may subsequently be reelected to the same office for one further term only.
The President and/or the Vice-President may be dismissed from his/her position during his/her term of office by the MPR on the proposal of the House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat or DPR), both if it is proven that he/she has violated the law through an act of treason, corruption, bribery, or other act of a grave criminal nature, or through moral turpitude, and/or that the President and/or Vice-President no longer meets the qualifications to serve as President and/or Vice-President.
The President may not freeze and/or dissolve the DPR.
Presidential (Vice-Presidential) Oath:
"I swear before God that, to the best of my ability, I shall fulfil as justly as possible my duties as President (Vice-President) of the Republic of Indonesia, that I shall uphold faithfully the Constitution, conscientiously implement all statutes and regulations, and shall devote myself to the service of Country and Nation."
Presidential (Vice-Presidential) Promise:
"I solemnly promise that, to the best of my ability, I shall fulfil as justly as possible my duties as President (Vice-President) of the Republic of Indonesia, that I shall uphold faithfully the Constitution, conscientiously implement all statutes and regulations, and shall devote myself to the service of Country and Nation."
The President is the Supreme Commander of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force.
The President may declare a state of emergency. The conditions for such a declaration and the subsequent measures regarding a state of emergency shall be regulated by law.
The President may grant titles, decorations and other honours as provided by law.
The President shall establish an advisory council with the duty of giving advice and considered opinion to the President, which shall be further regulated by law.
Deleted.
DPR members shall have the right to propose bills.
Further provisions regarding the procedures to establish laws shall be regulated by law.
DPR members may be removed from office, according to conditions and procedures which shall be regulated by law.
All taxes and other levies for the needs of the State of a compulsory nature shall be regulated by law.
The forms and denomination of the national currency shall be regulated by law.
Other matters concerning state finances shall be regulated by law.
The State shall have a central bank, the structure, composition, authorities, responsibilities and independence of which shall be regulated by law.
The appointment and dismissal of judges shall be regulated by law.
The Unitary State of the Republic of Indonesia is an archipelagic state, the boundaries and rights of whose territory shall be established by law.
The freedom to associate and to assemble, to express written and oral opinions, etc., shall be regulated by law.
Every person shall have the right to live and to defend his/her life and existence.
Every person shall have the right to communicate and to obtain information for the purpose of the development of his/her self and social environment, and shall have the right to seek, obtain, possess, store, process and convey information by employing all available types of channels.
The national flag of Indonesia shall be the Red and White (Sang Merah Putih).
The national language shall be Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia).
The national coat of arms shall be the Pancasila eagle (Garuda Pancasila) with the motto Unity in Diversity (Bhinneka Tunggal Ika).
The national anthem shall be Indonesia Raya.
Further provisions regarding the national flag, language, coat of arms and anthem shall be regulated by law.
All existing state institutions shall remain in place in order to implement the provisions of this Constitution as long as new state institutions are not yet established in conformity with this Constitution.
All existing laws and regulations shall remain in effect as long as new laws and regulations have not yet taken effect under this Constitution.
The Constitutional Court shall be established at the latest by 17 August 2003, and the Supreme Court shall undertake its functions before it is established.
The MPR is tasked to undertake a review of the content and the legal status of the Decrees (TAP) of the MPRS and the MPR for decision by the MPR at its session in 2003.
With the enactment of this Amendment to the Constitution, the Constitution of the State of the Republic of Indonesia shall consist of the Preamble and the Articles.
