The Knesset is the parliament of the State.
The place of sitting of the Knesset is Jerusalem.
The Knesset shall, upon its election, consist of one hundred and twenty members.
The Knesset shall be elected by general, national, direct, equal, secret and proportional elections, in accordance with the Knesset Elections Law; this section shall not be varied save by a majority of the members of the Knesset.
Every Israel national of or over the age of eighteen years shall have the right to vote in elections to the Knesset, unless a court has deprived him of that right by virtue of any Law; the Elections Law shall determine the time at which a person shall be considered to be eighteen years of age for the purpose of the exercise of the right to vote in elections to the Knesset.
A list of candidates for the Knesset shall be submitted only by a party; The means of association and registering of parties and the conditions for submitting a list of candidates shall be determined by law.
"Offence" means each of the offences for which a period of actual imprisonment has been ordered.
"Consideration " – means directly or indirectly, by a promise or future commitment, including the assurance of a place on a list of candidates for the Knesset, or the appointment of the Knesset member himself or someone else to a certain position.
The following shall not be candidates for the Knesset:
Unless they have ceased to serve in the aforementioned position or office, prior to the date for submitting the lists of candidates for the Knesset, and if an earlier date has been set by law prior to the set date.
The term of office of the Knesset shall be four years from the day on which it is elected.
The elections to the Knesset shall take place on the third Tuesday of the month of Cheshvan in the year in which the tenure of the outgoing Knesset ends, But if the year which preceded that year was a leap year, the elections shall take place on the first Tuesday of that month.
Election Day shall be a day of rest, but transport services and other public services shall function normally.
The results of the elections shall he published in “Reshumot” within eight days from Election Day.
The Knesset shall convene for its first meeting, after the election results are published, within fourteen days of Election Day on the date fixed by law, unless an earlier date is prescribed by law due to a rest day, holiday, festival day, memorial day, or due to proximity to one of them, or due to the intermediate days of certain Jewish festivals.
[Annulled]
The procedures of the opening meeting shall be prescribed by law and shall express the character of the State of Israel and its heritage.
"I pledge myself to bear allegiance to the State of Israel and faithfully to discharge my mandate in the Knesset."
Where the Chairman of the Knesset has called upon a member of the Knesset to make his declaration of allegiance and the member has not done so, the member shall not enjoy the rights of a member of the Knesset so long as he has not made the declaration.
Has the Knesset member been the holder of an additional non-Israeli citizenship, and the laws of the country whose citizenship he holds permit his release from such citizenship, he shall not declare allegiance until after he has done everything required on his part to be released from such citizenship, and he shall not enjoy the rights of a Knesset member until he makes his declaration.
The members of the Knesset shall have immunity; particulars shall be prescribed by Law.
The building of the Knesset shall have immunity; particulars shall be prescribed by Law.
The Knesset shall itself prescribe its procedure; in so far as such procedure has not been prescribed by Law, the Knesset shall prescribe it by its Rules; so long as the procedure has not been prescribed as aforesaid, the Knesset shall follow its accepted practice and routine
The Knesset may appoint commissions of inquiry - either by empowering one of the permanent committees in that behalf or by electing a commission from among its members - to investigate matters designated by the Knesset; the powers and functions of a commission of inquiry shall be prescribed by the Knesset; every commission of inquiry shall include also representatives of factions which do not participate in the Government, in accordance with the relative strength of the factions in the Knesset.
A member of the Government who is not a member of the Knesset shall, as to everything relating to the Knesset, have the same status as a member of the Government who is a member of the Knesset, except that he shall not have the right to vote.
The Knesset shall hold debates and pass decisions whatever the number of members present, save as otherwise provided by Law.
Save as otherwise provided by Law, the Knesset shall pass its decisions by a majority of those participating in the voting - those abstaining not being reckoned as participating - and the voting procedure shall be prescribed by the Rules.
The meetings of the Knesset shall be held at its place of sitting: Provided that in special circumstances the Chairman of the Knesset may, in consultation with the Vice-Chairmen, convene the Knesset elsewhere. The meetings of the Knesset shall take place on workdays.
The Knesset shall sit in public.
The publication of proceedings taken and utterances made at an open meeting is not restricted and does not entail any criminal or civil liability.
[Annulled]
[Annulled]
Orders concerning the periods of Knesset sessions and the convening of the Knesset out of session shall be prescribed by law.
[Annulled]
[Annulled]
The Knesset shall not decide to dissolve itself before the expiration of its term of office save by adopting a Law for that purpose passed by a majority of the members of the Knesset.
The Law concerning the dissolution of the Knesset shall contain a provision as to the date of the elections to the next Knesset, which shall be no later than five months from the day the law is passed.
If the Knesset decides to dissolve itself, the term of office of the next Knesset shall run until the month of Cheshvan next following the termination of four years from the day of its election.
The outgoing Knesset shall continue to hold office until the convening of the incoming Knesset.
Any enactment due to expire during the last two months of the term of office of the outgoing Knesset or within four months after the Knesset has decided to dissolve itself or during the first three months of the term of office of the incoming Knesset shall continue in force until the expiration of the said three months.
The members of the Knesset shall receive a remuneration as provided by Law.
A member of the Knesset may resign his office; resignation shall be by personal presentation of a letter of resignation by the resigning member to the Chairman of the Knesset or, if the member is unable to present the letter of resignation personally, by transmission thereof in the manner prescribed by the Rules; the letter of resignation shall be signed on the day of the presentation or transmission.
If a member of the Knesset tenders his resignation, his membership of the Knesset shall cease forty-eight hours after the letter of resignation reaches the Chairman of the Knesset, unless the member withdraws resignation before then.
If a member of the Knesset, or a candidate to the Knesset, is elected or appointed to one of the posts the holders of which are debarred from being candidates for the Knesset, his membership of the Knesset or his candidacy to the Knesset, as relevant, shall cease upon his election or appointment to one of the above positions; For this purpose, "a candidate for the Knesset" – means one whose name is included in the candidates’ list for the Knesset, from the day the list is submitted until the day of the beginning of his tenure as a member of the Knesset.
Notwithstanding the provision of any other law, this Law cannot be varied, suspended, or made subject to conditions, by emergency regulations.
Section 44, or this section, shall not be varied save by a majority of eighty members of the Knesset.
Section 45 shall also apply with regard to variation of Section 9A(a).
The majority required by this Law for a variation of section 4, 9A, 34, 44 or 45 shall be required for decisions of the Knesset plenary at the first, second and third readings. In this section, "variation" means both an express and an implicit variation.
The ownership of Israel lands, being the lands in Israel of the State, the Development Authority or the Keren Kayemet Le-Israel, shall not be transferred either by sale or in any other manner.
Section 1 shall not apply to classes of lands and classes of transactions determined for that purpose by Law.
In this Law, "lands" means land, houses, buildings and anything permanently fixed to land.
A President shall stand at the head of the State.
The place of residence of the President of the State shall be Jerusalem.
Every Israel national who is a resident of Israel is qualified to be a candidate for the office of President of the State.
The election of the President of the State shall be held not earlier than ninety days and not later than thirty days before the expiration of the period of tenure of the President in office. If the place of the President of the State falls vacant before the expiration of his period of tenure, the election shall be held within forty-five days from the day on which such place falls vacant. The Chairman of the Knesset, in consultation with the Vice-Chairmen, shall fix the day of the election and shall notify it to all the members of the Knesset in writing at least three weeks in advance. If the day of the election does not fall in one of the session terms of the Knesset, the Chairman of the Knesset shall convene the Knesset for the election of the President of the State.
The election of the President of the State shall be by secret ballot at a meeting of the Knesset assigned only for that purpose.
The President-Elect shall make and sign before the Knesset the following declaration of allegiance:
"I pledge myself to bear allegiance to the State of Israel and to its laws and faithfully to carry out my functions as President of the State.".
The signature of the President of State on an official document, other than a document connected with the formation of a Government or the dissolution of a Knesset, shall require the countersignature of the Prime Minister or of such other Minister as the Government may decide.
The President of the State shall not be criminally prosecuted. The period during which, by virtue of this section, the President of the State cannot be prosecuted for an offence shall not be counted in calculating the period of prescription of that offence.
If the President of the State is required to give evidence, his evidence shall be taken at such place and time as shall be determined with his sanction.
The salary of the President of the State, and other payments to be made to him during his period of tenure, shall be fixed by resolution of the Knesset, which may empower the Finance Committee in that behalf. Resolutions under this section shall be published in “Reshumot”.
The President of the State shall not leave the territory of the State save with the sanction of the Government.
The President of the State may resign his office by submitting a letter of resignation to the Chairman of the Knesset. The letter of resignation shall not require a countersignature. The place of the President of the State shall become vacant forty-eight hours after the letter of resignation reaches the Chairman of the Knesset.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, this Law cannot be varied, suspended, or made subject to conditions, by emergency regulations.
The President of the State who was elected by the Knesset on the 27th Iyar, 5723 (21st May, 1963) shall be deemed to have been elected, and to hold office, under this Law.
Transactions in State property and the acquisition of rights and assumption of liabilities on behalf of the State shall be effected by a person empowered in that behalf by or under Law.
"Budgetary Reservation" – means a reservation to a bill, fulfilling all of the following:
"Budgetary Cost" – means Expenditure or a commitment for Expenditure from State Budget, or a Diminution in State Revenues, even if that Expenditure or Diminution is accompanied by a reduction in Expenditure or a commitment for Expenditure from State Budget, or by an increase in State Revenues;
"Expenditure from State Budget", "Diminution of State Revenues" - including expenditure from the budget of a Budgeted Body, or a diminution in the revenues of a Budgeted Body;
"Budgeted Body" – as defined by Article 21 of the Foundations of the Budget Act, 5745-1985.
The printing of legal tender currency notes and the minting of legal tender coins, and the issue thereof, shall be done under Law.
The State economy shall be subject to the inspection of the State Comptroller.
The Defence Army of Israel is the army of the State.
The duty of serving in the Army and recruitment for the Army shall be as prescribed by or by virtue of Law.
The power to issue instructions and orders binding in the Army shall be prescribed by or by virtue of Law.
No armed force other than the Defence Army of Israel shall be established or maintained except under Law.
Jerusalem, complete and united, is the capital of Israel.
Jerusalem is the seat of the President of the State, the Knesset, the Government and the Supreme Court.
The Holy Places shall be protected from desecration and any other violation and from anything likely to violate the freedom of access of the members of the different religions to the places sacred to them or their feelings towards those places.
The jurisdiction of Jerusalem includes, as pertaining to this basic law, among others, all of the area that is described in the appendix of the proclamation expanding the borders of municipal Jerusalem beginning the 20th of Sivan 5727 (June 28, 1967), as was given according to the Cities' Ordinance.
No authority that is stipulated in the law of the State of Israel or of the Jerusalem Municipality may be transferred either permanently or for an allotted period of time to a foreign body, whether political, governmental or to any other similar type of foreign body.
Clauses 5 and 6 shall not be modified except by a Basic Law passed by a majority of the members of the Knesset.
In this Law, "judge" means a judge of a court as aforesaid.
A person vested with judicial power shall not, in judicial matters, be subject to any authority but that of the Law.
A court shall sit in public unless otherwise provided by Law or unless the court otherwise directs under Law.
Only an Israeli national shall be appointed judge.
A person appointed judge shall make a declaration of allegiance before the President of the State. The declaration shall be as follows:
"I pledge myself to be in allegiance to the State of Israel and to its laws, to dispense justice fairly, not to pervert the law and to show no favor.".
The tenure of a judge shall begin upon his declaration of allegiance and shall end only -
A judge who has retired on pension may be appointed to the position of a judge for such time, in such manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed by Law.
A judge shall not engage in an additional occupation, and shall not carry out any public function save under law or with the consent of the President of the Supreme Court and the Minister of Justice.
Where a complaint is filed, criminal investigation is initiated, or indictment is filed against a judge, the President of the Supreme Court may suspend him from office for such period as he may prescribe.
The establishment, powers, places of sitting and areas of jurisdiction of the District Courts, the Magistrates' Courts and other courts shall be in accordance with Law.
A judgment of a court of first instance, other than a judgment of the Supreme Court, shall be appealable as of right.
In a matter adjudged by the Supreme Court by a bench of three, a further hearing may be held by a bench of five or more, on such grounds and in such manner as shall be prescribed by Law.
In a criminal matter adjudged finally, a retrial may be held on such grounds and in such manner as shall be prescribed by Law.
A court may have a registrar, who may or may not be a judge.
This Law cannot be varied, suspended, or made subject to conditions by emergency regulations.
Provisions as to the following matters shall be prescribed by Law:
Provisions as to the following matters shall be prescribed under Law:
The State Audit shall be implemented by the State Comptroller.
A body subject to State Audit will, upon request, immediately provide the State Comptroller with information, documents, explanations, or any other material which the Comptroller deems necessary for audit purposes.
The State Comptroller will investigate complaints from the public about bodies and persons, as provided by law: in this capacity the State Comptroller shall bear the title 'Commissioner for Complaints from the Public'.
The State Comptroller shall undertake additional tasks as provided by law.
In carrying out his functions, the State Comptroller shall be accountable only to the Knesset and not to the Cabinet.
Any Israeli citizen, residing in Israel, shall be eligible to serve as State Comptroller; any additional qualifications may be determined by law.
The State Comptroller elected shall make and sign before the Knesset the following declaration:
'I pledge allegiance to the State of Israel and to its laws, and will faithfully carry out my duties as State Comptroller'.
The budget of the State Comptroller's Office shall be determined by the Appropriations Committee of the Knesset, upon the recommendation of the State Comptroller, and will be published together with the State Budget.
The salary of the State Comptroller and other payments made to him during his term of office or subsequently, or to his survivors upon his demise, shall be determined by law or by a Knesset Resolution or by a duly authorized committee of the Knesset.
The State Comptroller shall not be removed from office except by one of the following:
If the State Comptroller is not able to fulfill his functions, an Acting Comptroller shall be appointed, in a manner and for a period as determined by law.
Fundamental human rights in Israel are founded upon recognition of the value of the human being, the sanctity of human life, and the principle that all persons are free; these rights shall be upheld in the spirit of the principles set forth in the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel.
The purpose of this Basic Law is to protect human dignity and liberty, in order to establish in a Basic Law the values of the State of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.
There shall be no violation of the life, body or dignity of any person as such.
There shall be no violation of the property of a person.
All persons are entitled to protection of their life, body and dignity.
There shall be no deprivation or restriction of the liberty of a person by imprisonment, arrest, extradition or otherwise.
There shall be no violation of rights under this Basic Law except by a law befitting the values of the State of Israel, enacted for a proper purpose, and to an extent no greater than is required, or by regulation enacted by virtue of express authorization in such law.
There shall be no restriction of rights under this Basic Law held by persons serving in the Israel Defense Forces, the Israel Police, the Prisons Service and other security organizations of the State, nor shall such rights be subject to conditions, except by virtue of a law, or by regulation enacted by virtue of a law, and to an extent no greater than is required by the nature and character of the service.
This Basic Law shall not affect the validity of any law (din) in force prior to the commencement of the Basic Law.
All governmental authorities are bound to respect the rights under this Basic Law.
This Basic Law cannot be varied, suspended or made subject to conditions by emergency regulations; notwithstanding, when a state of emergency exists, by virtue of a declaration under section 9 of the Law and Administration Ordinance, 5708-1948, emergency regulations may be enacted by virtue of said section to deny or restrict rights under this Basic Law, provided the denial or restriction shall be for a proper purpose and for a period and extent no greater than is required.
Fundamental human rights in Israel are founded upon recognition of the value of the human being, the sanctity of human life, and the principle that all persons are free; these rights shall be upheld in the spirit of the principles set forth in the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel.
The purpose of this Basic Law is to protect freedom of occupation, in order to establish in a Basic Law the values of the State of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.
Every Israel national or resident has the right to engage in any occupation, profession or trade.
There shall be no violation of freedom of occupation except by a law befitting the values of the State of Israel, enacted for a proper purpose, and to an extent no greater than is required, or by regulation enacted by virtue of express authorization in such law.
All governmental authorities are bound to respect the freedom of occupation of all Israel nationals and residents.
This Basic Law shall not be varied, suspended or made subject to conditions by emergency regulations.
This Basic Law shall not be varied except by a Basic Law passed by a majority of the members of the Knesset.
Basic Law: Freedom of Occupation is hereby repealed.
The provisions of any enactment which, immediately prior to this Basic Law would have been of effect but for this Basic Law or the Basic Law repealed in section 9, shall remain in effect until the day of 14 March 2002, unless repealed earlier; however, such provisions shall be construed in the spirit of the provisions of this Basic Law.
In Basic Law: Human Dignity and Liberty –
“Basic principles
"1. Fundamental human rights in Israel are founded upon recognition of the value of the human being, the sanctity of human life, and the principle that all persons are free; these rights shall be upheld in the spirit of the principles set forth in the Declaration of the Establishment of the State of Israel.”
The Government is the executive authority of the State.
The seat of the Government is Jerusalem.
The Government holds office by virtue of the confidence of the Knesset.
The Government is collectively responsible to the Knesset; each Minister is responsible to the Prime Minister for the field of responsibility with which the Minister has been charged.
The Knesset Member to whom the President has assigned the task of forming a Government under section 7 shall have a period of 28 days for the fulfillment of such task. The President of the State may extend the period by additional periods not exceeding in the aggregate 14 days.
When a Law for the dissolution of the Knesset has been adopted, the proceedings for the formation of a Government shall cease.
As soon as, or as soon as possible after, the Knesset has expressed confidence in the Government, the Prime Minister shall make before the Knesset the following declaration of allegiance: "I (name) as Prime Minister undertake to uphold the State of Israel and its laws, to faithfully fulfill my role as the Prime Minister and to comply with the decisions of the Knesset"; and each of the other Ministers shall make the following declaration of allegiance: "I (name) as a member of the Government, undertake to uphold the State of Israel and its laws, to faithfully fulfill my role as a member of the Government, and to comply with the decisions of the Knesset.".
The Government may, upon the proposal of the Prime Minister, coopt an additional Minister to the Government. When the Government has decided to coopt a Minister, it shall notify such fact and the function of the additional Minister to the Knesset. Upon the approval of the notification by the Knesset, the additional Minister shall assume office, and as soon as possible after the approval he shall make his declaration of allegiance.
The Prime Minister may, after notifying the Government of his intention to do so, resign by submitting a letter of resignation to the President of the State. The resignation of the Prime Minister shall be deemed to be the resignation of the Government.
The service of a Deputy Minister will be terminated in any of the following cases:
Should a Deputy Minister be convicted by the court, it shall state in its judgment whether the offense involves moral turpitude; should the court so state, the Deputy Minister's tenure shall cease on the day of the judgment.
The Government is authorized to perform in the name of the State, and subject to any law, all actions which are not legally incumbent on another authority.
A Minister charged with the implementation of a law, may assume any power, with the exception of powers of a judicial nature, granted by the same law to a civil servant, provided that no other intention is evidenced by the law; the Minister may do the above for a particular matter or for a specific period.
The salaries of the Ministers and the Deputy Ministers and other payments paid to them during their period of service or thereafter, or to their next of kin after their deaths, will be specified by law, or by virtue of a decision of the Knesset or of a Knesset committee appointed by the Knesset for that purpose.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, emergency regulations cannot change this Basic Law, temporarily suspend it, or make it subject to conditions.
When a the date for elections to the Knesset has been set under sections 11, 28, and 29, the Knesset may - by a resolution passed by a majority of its members adopted within five days after grounds for holding the elections arose - decide that because of the proximity of the date of elections to a holiday, festival day or memorial day, the elections will be postponed to a date no later than 100 days after the day on which such grounds arose.
In the Basic Law: The Knesset -
"21A. Knesset supervision of secondary legislation
"(c) Regulations enacted by a Minister whose violation entails criminal punishment shall not enter into force, unless they have been approved prior to publication by a committees of the Knesset committees responsible for that matter; should the committee fail to approve or reject the regulations within 45 days of receiving the regulations, the regulations will be deemed approved.
"(d) The provisions of this subsection do not prejudice the provisions of any Basic Law or other law regarding regulations."
“36A. Dispersion due to failure to adopt budget
"(c) Non-adoption of the Budget Law within three months subsequent to the beginning of the fiscal year will be considered to be a Knesset decision on its dispersion, prior to the completion of its term of service, on the day following the end of this period (hereafter: the determining date), and early elections will be held on the last Tuesday before the end of 90 days of the determining date, unless the Knesset decides by a majority vote of its members, within five days of the determining date, that because of the proximity of the date of elections to a holiday, festival day or memorial day, to postpone the elections to a date no later than 100 days from the determining date.
"(d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), should the President of the State begin procedures to form a new Government under section 30 of The Basic Law: The Government, or should a law be adopted to disperse the Knesset, or should elections to the Knesset be held, after the date for submission of the Draft Budget under section 3 of The Basic Law: The State Economy and before the passage of three months from the beginning of the fiscal year, the determining day under subsection (a), shall be "three months from the beginning of the fiscal year or 45 days from the constitution of the Government, whichever is later."
The Basic Law: The Government (1992) is repealed.
