We, the people of Kazakhstan, united by common historic fate, creating state on the indigenous Kazakh land, considering ourselves peace-loving and civil society, dedicated to the ideals of freedom, equality and concord, wishing to take worthy place in the world community, realizing our high responsibility before the present and future generations, proceeding from our sovereign right, accept this Constitution.
The Republic of Kazakhstan shall respect principles and norms of international law, pursue the policy of cooperation and good-neighborly relations between states, their equality and non-interference in each other’s domestic affairs, peaceful settlement of international disputes and renounce the first use of the military force.
The Republic of Kazakhstan shall have its state symbols - the flag, emblem and anthem. Their description and order of official use shall be established by the constitutional law.
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall have the right to peacefully and without arms assemble, hold meetings, rallies and demonstrations, street processions and pickets. The use of this right may be restricted by law in the interests of state security, public order, protection of health, rights and freedoms of other persons.
Payment of legally established taxes, fees and other obligatory payments shall be duty and responsibility of everyone.
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan must care for the protection of historical and cultural heritage, and preserve monuments of history and culture.
Citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan must preserve nature and protect natural resources.
A deputy of Majilis of the Parliament shall be deprived of his mandate in cases:
Parliament at a joint session of the Chambers shall:
The following shall belong to exclusive jurisdiction of the Senate:
Each Chamber of the Parliament independently, without participation of the other Chamber shall:
The Government shall:
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall:
The courts shall have no right to apply laws and other regulatory legal acts infringing on the rights and liberties of an individual and citizen established by the Constitution. If court finds that law or other regulatory legal act subject to application infringes on the rights and liberties of an individual and citizen it shall suspend legal proceedings and address the Constitutional Council with proposal to declare that law unconstitutional.
Financing of courts, provision of judges with housing shall be performed from the republican budget and must ensure the possibility of complete and free exercise of justice.
The Supreme Court of the Republic of Kazakhstan is the highest judicial body for civil, criminal and other cases examinable by local and other courts in cases stipulated by law and shall consider legal cases within its jurisdiction and provide interpretations on judicial practice.
[deleted by the law of 21 May 2007 N 254]
Local public administration shall be exercised by local representative and executive bodies which are responsible for the state of affairs of the respective territory.
With the purpose of implementation of article of the Constitution, the Government, local representative and executive bodies must create all necessary organizational, material and technical conditions for fluent and free-of-charge mastery of the state language by all citizens of the Republic of Kazakhstan in accordance with special law.
Position of paragraph 1 of article 41 of the Constitution, defining a term of powers of the President of the Republic, shall be applied to the person who will be elected by the President of the Republic following the results of presidential election spent in connection with the expiration of a seven-year term of powers of the President of the Republic, elected in the elections on December 4th 2005.
The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Kazakhstan from the day of enactment of this Constitution shall acquire the rights, obligations and responsibility of the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
The first composition of the Constitutional Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan shall be formed in the following manner: the President of the Republic, the Chairperson of the Senate of Parliament, the Chairperson of the Majilis of Parliament shall each appoint one member to the Constitutional Council for three-year term and shall each appoint one member to the Constitutional Council for six-year term. The Chairperson of the Constitutional Council shall be appointed by the President of the Republic for six-year term.
