We, the people of Kosovo,
Determined to build a future of Kosovo as a free, democratic and peace-loving country that will be a homeland to all of its citizens;
Committed to the creation of a state of free citizens that will guarantee the rights of every citizen, civil freedoms and equality of all citizens before the law;
Committed to the state of Kosovo as a state of economic wellbeing and social prosperity;
Convinced that the state of Kosovo will contribute to the stability of the region and entire Europe by creating relations of good neighborliness and cooperation with all neighboring countries;
Convinced that the state of Kosovo will be a dignified member of the family of peace-loving states in the world;
With the intention of having the state of Kosovo fully participating in the processes of Euro-Atlantic integration;
In a solemn manner, we approve the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo.
The Republic of Kosovo is a secular state and is neutral in matters of religious beliefs.
The Republic of Kosovo ensures the preservation and protection of its cultural and religious heritage.
A market economy with free competition is the basis of the economic order of the Republic of Kosovo.
The acquisition and termination of the right of citizenship of the Republic of Kosovo are provided by law.
The Republic of Kosovo protects the interests of its citizens abroad as provided by law.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the following international agreements and instruments are guaranteed by this Constitution, are directly applicable in the Republic of Kosovo and, in the case of conflict, have priority over provisions of laws and other acts of public institutions:
Human dignity is inviolable and is the basis of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Every person enjoys the right to have his/her physical and psychological integrity respected, which includes:
No one shall be subject to torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Everyone charged with a criminal offense shall enjoy the following minimum rights:
Every person has the right to pursue legal remedies against judicial and administrative decisions which infringe on his/her rights or interests, in the manner provided by law.
No one shall be tried more than once for the same criminal act.
Freedom of peaceful gathering is guaranteed. Every person has the right to organize gatherings, protests and demonstrations and the right to participate in them. These rights may be limited by law, if it is necessary to safeguard public order, public health, national security or the protection of the rights of others.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms guaranteed by this Constitution shall be interpreted consistent with the court decisions of the European Court of Human Rights.
Everyone enjoys the right of judicial protection if any right guaranteed by this Constitution or by law has been violated or denied and has the right to an effective legal remedy if found that such right has been violated.
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 1, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Members of communities shall have the right, individually or in community, to:
Communities and their members shall be entitled to equitable representation in employment in public bodies and publicly owned enterprises at all levels, including in particular in the police service in areas inhabited by the respective Community, while respecting the rules concerning competence and integrity that govern public administration.
The Assembly is the legislative institution of the Republic of Kosovo directly elected by the people.
The Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo:
[Added by Constitutional Amendment 23, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 5 / 12 MARCH 2013, PRISTINA]
A member of the Assembly of Kosovo shall neither keep any executive post in the public administration or in any publicly owned enterprise nor exercise any other executive function as provided by law.
Deputies of the Assembly of Kosovo shall exercise their function in best interest of the Republic of Kosovo and pursuant to the Constitution, Laws and Rules of Procedure of the Assembly.
The Rules of Procedure of the Assembly are adopted by two thirds (2/3) vote of all its deputies and shall determine the internal organization and method of work for the Assembly.
The initiative to propose laws may be taken by the President of the Republic of Kosovo from his/her scope of authority, the Government, deputies of the Assembly or at least ten thousand citizens as provided by law.
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 2, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 3, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
The President is the head of state and represents the unity of the people of the Republic of Kosovo.
The President of the Republic of Kosovo:
Every citizen of the Republic of Kosovo who is thirty five (35) years old or older may be elected President of the Republic of Kosovo.
The President of the Republic of Kosovo shall be immune from prosecution, civil lawsuit and dismissal for actions or decisions that are within the scope of responsibilities of the President of the Republic of Kosovo.
The Government has the following competencies:
The Prime Minister has the following competencies:
Members of the Government shall be immune from prosecution, civil lawsuit and dismissal for actions or decisions that are within the scope of their responsibilities as members of the Government.
The methods of work and decision making procedures of the Government shall be regulated by law and regulations.
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 25, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 9 / 11 MARCH 2016, PRISTINA]
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 25, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 9 / 11 MARCH 2016, PRISTINA]
Judges of the Constitutional Court shall be immune from prosecution, civil lawsuit and dismissal for actions taken, decisions made or opinions expressed that are within the scope of their responsibilities as Judges of the Constitutional Court.
Judges of the Constitutional Court may be dismissed by the President of the Republic of Kosovo upon the proposal of two thirds (2/3) of the judges of the Constitutional Court only for the commission of a serious crime or for serious neglect of duties.
Auditor-General of the Republic of Kosovo audits:
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 4, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution:
[Moved to Chapter I by Constitutional Amendment 5, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
[Moved to Chapter I by Constitutional Amendment 6, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 7, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution:
This Constitution shall enter into force and effect on 15 June 2008.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 8, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, the International Civilian Representative shall, in accordance with the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement dated 26 March 2007, be the final authority in Kosovo regarding interpretation of the civilian aspects of the said Comprehensive Proposal. No Republic of Kosovo authority shall have jurisdiction to review, diminish or otherwise restrict the mandate, powers and obligations referred to in Article 146 and this Article.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 10, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 81 of this Constitution, the laws of vital interest enumerated therein shall be initially adopted by the majority vote of the deputies of the Assembly present and voting.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 12, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Until the end of the international supervision of the implementation of the Comprehensive Proposal for Kosovo Status Settlement, dated 26 March 2007, the Kosovo Judicial Council shall be composed as follows:
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 13, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Until the end of the international supervision of the implementation of the Comprehensive Proposal for Kosovo Status Settlement, dated 26 March 2007, the Constitutional Court shall be composed as follows:
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 14, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding any provision of this Constitution, the International Military Presence has the mandate and powers set forth under the relevant international instruments including United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 and the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement dated 26 March 2007. The Head of the International Military Presence shall, in accordance with the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement dated 26 March 2007, be the final authority in theatre regarding interpretation of those aspects of the said Settlement that refer to the International Military Presence. No Republic of Kosovo authority shall have jurisdiction to review, diminish or otherwise restrict the mandate, powers and obligations referred to in this Article.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 15, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
The Kosovo Protection Corps shall be dissolved within one year after entry into force of this Constitution. Until such dissolution, the International Military Presence, in consultation with the International Civilian Representative and the Republic of Kosovo, shall exercise executive authority over the Kosovo Protection Corps and shall decide on the schedule of its dissolution.
[Moved to Chapter I by Constitutional Amendment 16, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
[Moved to Chapter II by Constitutional Amendment 16, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
The Republic of Kosovo shall promote and facilitate the safe and dignified return of refugees and internally displaced persons and assist them in recovering their property and possession.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 18, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Until the end of the international supervision of the implementation of the Comprehensive Proposal for Kosovo Status Settlement, dated 26 March 2007, the Auditor-General of the Republic of Kosovo shall be an international appointed by the International Civilian Representative.
[Abrogated by Constitutional Amendment 19, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Until the end of the international supervision of the implementation of the Comprehensive Proposal for Kosovo Status Settlement, dated 26 March 2007, the Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Kosovo shall be appointed by the President of the Republic of Kosovo following consent by the International Civilian Representative.
[As amended by Constitutional Amendment 22, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
The individuals appointed by the International Civilian Representatives in accordance with the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement, 26 March 2007 whose appointments have not been terminated prior to the declaration of the end of supervised independence shall continue to carry out their functions in the institution for the specified term of appointment. Kosovo shall accord to these individuals the same privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by diplomatic agents and their families under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
[Added by Constitutional Amendment 24, published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 20 / 5 AUGUST 2015, PRISTINA]
Notwithstanding any provision in this Constitution:
[Published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 25 / 7 SEPTEMBER 2012, PRISTINA]
Article 58, paragraph 4., shall be reworded with the following text:
The Republic of Kosovo shall adopt adequate measures as may be necessary to promote full and effective equality in all areas of economic, social, political and cultural life, among members of communities and the effective participation of communities and their members in public life and decision making. Such measures shall not be considered to be an act of discrimination.
Article 81, paragraph 1. shall be reworded with the following text:
The following laws shall require for their adoption, amendment of abrogation both the majority of the Assembly deputies and the majority of the Assembly deputies who hold seats guaranteed for representatives of Communities that are not in the majority.
Article 81 paragraph 1. item ( 5) shall be deleted and reworded as follows: Laws on protection of cultural heritage and special protected areas.
Article 143 shall be deleted.
Article 144 (Amendments), shall be moved to Chapter I -- Basic Provisions
Article 145 (Continuity of International Agreements and Applicable Legislation), shall be moved to Chapter I -- Basic Provisions.
Article 146 shall be deleted.
Article 147 shall be deleted.
Article 148 shall be deleted.
Article 149 shall be deleted.
Article 150 shall be deleted.
Article 151 shall be deleted.
Article 152 shall be deleted.
Article 153 shall be deleted.
Article 154 shall be deleted.
Article 155 (Citizenship), shall be moved to Chapter I -- Basic Provisions.
Article 156 (Refugees and Internally Displaced Persons) shall be moved to Chapter II of the Constitution.
Article 157 shall be deleted.
Article 158 shall be deleted.
Article 159 shall be deleted.
Article 160 shall be deleted.
Article 161 shall be deleted and a new Article shall be added as transitional provision with the following text:
Article 161 Transitional Provision
The individuals appointed by the International Civilian Representatives in accordance with the Comprehensive Proposal for the Kosovo Status Settlement, 26 March 2007 whose appointments have not been terminated prior to the declaration of the end of supervised independence shall continue to carry out their functions in the institution for the specified term of appointment. Kosovo shall accord to these individuals the same privileges and immunities as are enjoyed by diplomatic agents and their families under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
Decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo, No. 04-V-436 on September 7, 2012
[Published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 6 / 12 MARCH 2013, PRISTINA]
Article 65, after point (14) there is added point (15), with the following text:
"(15) gives amnesty by the respective Law, which shall be approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the votes of all deputies of the Assembly."
Decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo No. 04-V-553, 14 March 2013.
[Published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 20 / 05 AUGUST 2015, PRISTINA]
Following Article 161, a new Article should be added and amended as follows:
Article 162
[The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office]
Notwithstanding any provision in this Constitution:
1- To comply with its international obligations in relation to the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly Report Doc 12462 of 7 January 2011, the Republic of Kosovo may establish Specialist Chambers and a Specialist Prosecutor's Office within the justice system of Kosovo. The organization, functioning and jurisdiction of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall be regulated by this Article and by a specific law.
2- The Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall uphold the protections enshrined within Chapter II of the Constitution, and in particular shall act in compliance with the international human rights standards guaranteed by Article 22 and subject to Article 55.
3- A Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court, composed of three (3) international judges appointed in addition to the judges referred to in Article 114 (1), shall exclusively decide any constitutional referrals under Article 113 of the Constitution relating to the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office in accordance with a specific law.
4- The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall have full legal and juridical personality and shall have all the necessary powers and mandate for their operation, judicial co-operation, assistance, witness protection, security, detention and the service of sentence outside the territory of Kosovo for anyone convicted, as well as in relation to the management of any residual matters after finalization of the mandate. Arrangements arising from the exercise of these powers are not subject to Article 18.
5- Before entering into any international treaty with a third state relating to judicial cooperation, which would otherwise require ratification under Article 18, the Specialist Chambers shall seek the agreement of the Government.
6- The Specialist Chambers may determine its own Rules of Procedure and Evidence, in accordance with international human rights standards as enshrined in Article 22 and be guided by the Kosovo Code of Criminal Procedure. The Specialist Chamber of the Constitutional Court shall review the Rules to ensure compliance with Chapter II of the Constitution.
7- The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office may have a seat in Kosovo and a seat outside Kosovo. The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office may perform their functions at either seat or elsewhere, as required.
8- Consistent with international law and pursuant to international agreements, any persons accused of crimes before the Specialist Chambers may be detained on remand and transferred to the Specialist Chambers sitting outside the territory of Kosovo. If found guilty and sentenced to imprisonment, any such persons may be transferred to serve their sentence in a third country, outside the territory of Kosovo, pursuant to arrangements concluded under paragraph 4.
9- The official languages of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall be Albanian, Serbian and English. The Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor may decide on the official use of language(s) for the exercise of their mandate.
10- Appointment and oversight of judges and prosecutors and the oversight and administration of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall be in accordance with a specific law.
11- A separate Ombudsperson of the Specialist Chambers with exclusive responsibility for the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall be appointed and his/her function and reporting obligations determined by [a specific law]. Articles 133(2), 134, 135(1) and (2) shall not apply to the Ombudsperson for the Specialist Chambers. The Ombudsperson of Kosovo may also refer matters as provided by Article 135 (4).
12- Specific administrative procedures, modalities, the organisation and functioning of the Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office, the oversight, budgeting, auditing and other functions will be regulated by international agreement, by a specific law and through arrangements made under paragraph 4.
13- The mandate of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall be for a period of five (5) years, unless notification of completion of the mandate in accordance with Law No. 04/L-274 occurs earlier.
14- In the absence of notification of completion of the mandate under paragraph 12, the mandate of the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's Office shall continue until notification of completion is made in accordance with Law No. 04/L-274 and in consultation with the Government.
No.05 -D- 139 3 August 2015
Decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo No. 05-D-1 39, date: 3 August 2015
[Published in the OFFICIAL GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOSOVA / No. 9 / 11 MARCH 2016, PRISTINA]
Article 108, paragraph 6, sub-paragraph 1 and 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Kosovo shall be amended as follows:
(1) Seven (7) members shall be judges elected by the members of the judiciary.
(2) Two (2) members shall be elected by the deputies of the Assembly, holding seats attributed during the general distribution of seats and at least one of these two must be a judge."
No. 05-V-229 24 February 2016
Decision of the Assembly of the Republic of Kosovo No. 05-D-229, date: 24 February 2016
