We, John II, by the Grace of God, Prince Regnant of Liechtenstein, Duke of Troppau, Count of Rietberg, etc. etc. etc. make known that the Constitution of 26 September 1862 has been modified by Us with the assent of Our Parliament as follows:
The Principality is a constitutional, hereditary monarchy on a democratic and parliamentary basis (Art. 79 and 80); the power of the State is inherent in and issues from the Prince Regnant and the People and shall be exercised by both in accordance with the provisions of the present Constitution.
The succession to the throne, hereditary in the Princely House of Liechtenstein, the coming-of-age of the Prince Regnant and of the Heir Apparent, as well as any guardianship which may be required, are to be determined by the Princely House in the form of a dynasty law.
The coat of arms of the State is that of the Princely House of Liechtenstein; the national colours are blue and red.
The German language is the national and official language.
Every law shall require the sanction of the Prince Regnant in order to acquire validity.
The Prince Regnant shall appoint the judges in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution (Art. 96).
Every successor to the throne shall, before receiving the oath of allegiance, declare upon his Princely honour and dignity in a written proclamation that he will govern the Principality of Liechtenstein in conformity with the Constitution and the other laws, that he will maintain its integrity, and will observe the rights of sovereignty indivisibly and in like manner.
The Prince Regnant may entrust the next Heir Apparent of his House who has attained majority with the exercise of the sovereign powers held by him as his representative should he be temporarily prevented or in preparation for the Succession.
Not less than 1,500 citizens have the right to table a reasoned motion of no confidence in the Prince. Parliament must issue a recommendation on this at its next session and order the holding of a referendum in accordance with Art. 66 Para. 6. If the motion is accepted in the referendum, it must be communicated to the Prince for consideration under the dynasty law. The prince must inform Parliament within six months of the decision reached in compliance with the said Law.
The supreme function of the State is to promote the general welfare of the People. For this purpose, the State shall provide for the institution and maintenance of law, and for the protection of the religious, moral and economic interests of the People.
The State shall devote particular attention to education and schooling. This must be so ordered and administered that, from the co-operation of the family, the school and the Church, the younger generation may be imbued with religious and moral principles and patriotic sentiments and may be fitted for their future occupations.
The State shall be responsible for the public health system, assist institutions for the care of the sick, and seek by legislation to combat intemperance and to reform alcoholics and work-shy persons.
The State shall possess sovereign rights over waters in conformity with the laws existing or to be enacted hereafter in this matter. The utilisation and distribution of such waters and flood control measures shall be regulated by law and promoted, with due regard to the development of technology. Rights relating to electricity shall be regulated by law.
The State shall exercise sovereign rights over hunting, fishing and mining; when legislating on these matters, it shall protect the interests of agriculture and of communal revenues.
The currency and banking system shall be regulated by the State.
Public poor relief shall be administered by the communes in conformity with specific laws. The State shall be responsible, however, for the supervision of such activities. It may grant appropriate assistance to the communes, especially for the proper care of orphans, the mentally handicapped, persons suffering from incurable diseases and the aged.
The State shall support and promote health, old age, disability and fire insurance schemes.
The conditions under which citizenship rights may be acquired or forfeited shall be determined by law.
Trade and industry shall be free within the limits prescribed by law; the extent to which exclusive commercial and industrial privileges may be admissible for specified periods of time shall be regulated by law.
The right of ownership and all other proprietary rights of ecclesiastical communities and religious associations in respect of their institutions, foundations and other possessions devoted to worship, education and charity are guaranteed. The administration of Church property in the parishes shall be regulated by a special law; the assent of the Church authorities shall be sought before the said law is promulgated.
The enjoyment of civil and political rights shall not be dependent on religious belief nor may the latter constitute a ground for any dereliction of civil obligations.
Every person shall be entitled to freely express his opinion and to communicate his ideas by word of mouth or in writing, print or pictures within the limits of the law and morality; no censorship may be exercised except in respect of public performances and exhibitions.
The right of free association and assembly is guaranteed within the limits prescribed by law.
The right to petition Parliament and the National Committee is guaranteed; not only individuals whose rights or interests are affected but also communes and corporations are entitled to have their wishes and requests brought before Parliament by a member of that body.
The right of complaint is guaranteed. Any citizen shall be entitled to lodge a complaint regarding any action or procedure on the part of a public authority which is contrary to the Constitution, the law or the official regulations and detrimental to his rights or interests. Such complaint shall be addressed to that authority which is immediately superior to the authority concerned and may, if necessary, be pursued to the highest authority, except when the right of recourse may be barred by a legal restriction. If a complaint thus submitted is rejected by the superior authority, the latter shall be bound to declare to the complaining party the reasons for its decision.
Should Parliament be dissolved, new elections must take place within six weeks. The newly elected Representatives shall then be summoned to meet within fourteen days.
The Representatives shall be bound to attend in person at the seat of the Government in compliance with the notice of convocation. If a Representative is impeded from attending, he must, on receiving the first notice of convocation, promptly notify the Government and subsequently the President, stating the reasons preventing his attendance. If the impediment is of a permanent nature, a by-election shall be held, if the Representative cannot be replaced by the substitution system.
“I hereby swear to observe the State Constitution and the existing laws and to promote in Parliament the welfare of the country, without any ulterior motives, to the best of my ability and conscience. So help me God.”
Parliament shall be closed by the Prince Regnant, in person or by his proxy.
Parliament shall adopt its rules of procedure by a resolution and with due regard to the provisions of the present Constitution.
Representatives shall receive from the State Treasury a daily allowance and travel expenses as prescribed by law.
In particular, the following matters shall fall within the sphere of activity of Parliament:
Parliament has the right to appoint investigational committees. It is obliged to do so when at least one quarter of the number of Representatives fixed by law requests this.
Parliament shall appoint a finance committee to which the passing of resolutions on the acquisition and alienation of landed property belonging to the administrative and financial assets as well as participation in the administration of the financial assets may also be transferred by law.
The Government shall administer the financial assets of the State in accordance with principles which it shall lay down in agreement with Parliament. It shall submit a report to Parliament together with the annual accounts (Art. 69 Para. 2).
The National Committee (Landesausschuss) shall be constituted to act in place of Parliament for any business which requires the participation of the latter or of its committees during the period between the adjournment, closing or dissolution of Parliament and the date of its next meeting, without prejudice, however, to the provisions of Art. 48 to 51 concerning the time limits for the reconvocation of Parliament and for the holding of new elections.
The term of office of the National Committee shall expire when Parliament reconvenes.
The National Committee shall have the following special powers and duties:
The National Committee may not enter into any permanent obligation on behalf of the Principality and shall be responsible to Parliament for its conduct of affairs.
During the sessions of the National Committee, its members shall receive the same daily allowance and travel expenses as the members of Parliament.
For a decision of the Collegial Government to be valid, at least four members must be present and a majority of those members present must vote in favour. In the event of a tie, the chairman has the casting vote. Voting is compulsory.
The grounds on which a member of the Government may be debarred from the performance of an official act or invited to abstain therefrom shall be laid down in law.
Government business shall be dealt with partly on a collegial basis and partly on a departmental basis.
The Collegial Government shall issue its rules of procedure in the form of a Government regulation.
The Head of the Government shall preside at meetings of the Government, deal with business directly entrusted to him by the Prince Regnant, and countersign the laws and any decrees or ordinances issued by the Prince Regnant or a Regent. At public ceremonies he shall be accorded the honours prescribed by the regulations for the Representative of the Prince Regnant.
The Head of the Government shall take his oath of office before the Prince Regnant or the Regent; the other members of the Government and the State officials shall be sworn in by the Head of the Government.
If the Head of the Government should be prevented from attending to his duties, the Deputy Head of the Government shall take over those functions which, according to the Constitution, expressly appertain to the Head of the Government. If the Deputy Head of the Government should also be prevented, the eldest Government Councillor shall take his place.
The Head of the Government shall sign the decrees and orders issued by the Government in pursuance of its decisions taken in council. He shall further exercise direct supervision over the conduct of business in the Government.
At the beginning of each period of office, the Collegial Government shall distribute its business between the Head of the Government and the Government Councillors to prepare the matters to be determined in council and to deal with that business which by law may be treated independently. A system of mutual deputizing shall be arranged for cases of indisposition.
The following matters in particular shall fall within the sphere of action of the Government:
The organization of the administration shall be established by law.
The handling of particular, precisely specified kinds of business pertaining to the administration of justice in the first instance may be assigned by means of a law to specially trained non-judicial employees of the Court of Justice who are bound by instructions (Rechtspfleger).
The revenue authorities and the officials of the Crown lands shall appear before the ordinary courts as plaintiffs and defendants.
Detailed instructions regarding procedure, abstention, allowances to be paid to the members, and fees to be paid by the parties involved shall be laid down in a separate law.
The Constitutional Court shall consist of five judges and substitutes appointed by the Prince Regnant (Art. 96). The President of the Constitutional Court and the majority of the judges must possess Liechtenstein citizenship. Furthermore, the provisions of Art. 102 apply mutatis mutandis.
Open-ended judicial positions may only be created with the consent of Parliament.
The organization of the authorities shall be determined by legislation. Subject to treaty obligations, all authorities must have their seat within the territory of the State; collegial authorities must include at least a majority of Liechtenstein citizens.
Members of the Government, State officials, and all mayors, their deputies and the treasurers of the communes shall take the following oath on appointment:
“I swear that I will be loyal to the Prince Regnant, that I will obey the laws and that I will strictly observe the Constitution. So help me God.”
All Liechtenstein citizens who are at least eighteen years of age and whose right to vote has not been suspended shall be eligible to vote in municipal matters in the municipality in which they reside.
All laws, regulations and statutory provisions which contradict any express provision of the present Constitution are hereby revoked and declared invalid; legal provisions which are inconsistent with the spirit of this fundamental law shall be revised to conform with the Constitution.
