THE PEOPLE OF MALAWI—
guided by their private consciences and collective wisdom;
seeking to guarantee the welfare and development of all the people of Malawi, national harmony and peaceful international relations;
desirous of creating a constitutional order in the Republic of Malawi based on the need for an open, democratic and accountable government:
HEREBY adopt the following as the Constitution of the Republic of Malawi.
The Republic of Malawi is a sovereign State with rights and obligations under the Law of Nations.
Malawi shall have a National Flag, a National Coat of Arms, a National Anthem and a Public Seal.
The national territory of the Republic of Malawi shall consist of all the territory, including airspace, waters and islands which comprised the territory of Malawi before the commencement of this Constitution, and shall include any territory lawfully acquired thereafter by adjustment of boundaries or otherwise.
This Constitution shall bind all executive, legislative and judicial organs of the State at all levels of Government and all the peoples of Malawi are entitled to the equal protection of this Constitution, and laws made under it.
Any act of Government or any law that is inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be invalid.
Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the authority to govern derives from the people of Malawi as expressed through universal and equal suffrage in elections held in accordance with this Constitution in a manner prescribed by an Act of Parliament.
The executive shall be responsible for the initiation of policies and legislation and for the implementation of all laws which embody the express wishes of the people of Malawi and which promote the principles of this Constitution.
The legislature shall be responsible for the enactment of laws and shall ensure that its deliberations reflect the interests of all the people of Malawi and that the values expressed or implied in this Constitution are furthered by the laws enacted.
The judiciary shall have the responsibility of interpreting, protecting and enforcing this Constitution and all laws and in accordance with this Constitution in an independent and impartial manner with regard only to legally relevant facts and the prescriptions of law.
The State shall actively promote the welfare and development of the people of Malawi by progressively adopting and implementing policies and legislation aimed at achieving the following goals—
The principles of national policy contained in this Chapter shall be directory in nature but courts shall be entitled to have regard to them in interpreting and applying any of the provisions of this Constitution or of any law or in determining the validity of decisions of the executive and in the interpretation of the provisions of this Constitution.
Every person has the right to life and no person shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life:
Provided that the execution of the death sentence imposed by a competent court on a person in respect of a criminal offence under the laws of Malawi of which he or she has been convicted shall not be regarded as arbitrary deprivation of his or her right to life.
Acts of genocide are prohibited and shall be prevented and punished.
Every person has the right to personal liberty.
Every person shall have the right to personal privacy, which shall include the right not to be subject to—
Every person shall have the right to use the language and to participate in the cultural life of his or her choice.
Every person shall have the right freely to engage in economic activity, to work and to pursue a livelihood anywhere in Malawi.
Every person has the right to freedom of conscience, religion, belief and thought, and to academic freedom.
Every person shall have the right to freedom of opinion, including the right to hold, receive and impart opinions without interference.
Every person shall have the right to freedom of expression.
The press shall have the right to report and publish freely, within Malawi and abroad, and to be accorded the fullest possible facilities for access to public information.
Every person shall have the right of access to all information held by the State or any of its organs at any level of Government in so far as such information is required for the exercise of his or her rights.
Every person shall have the right to assemble and demonstrate with others peacefully and unarmed.
Every person shall have the right to—
Every member of Parliament, before taking his or her seat, and every officer of Parliament, before assuming duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe before the Chief Justice in the National Assembly—
Provided that the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker shall have the right to be heard by the Chamber on his or her own motion on any matter relating to his or her removal from office.
Provided that in the absence of the Speaker and every Deputy Speaker, the members of the National Assembly may elect one of their number to act as Speaker for as long as there is no Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
There shall be a Clerk to the National Assembly who shall be a public officer and shall assist the Speaker of the National Assembly and perform such other functions and duties as the Speaker may direct.
Except upon the recommendation of the Minister responsible for Finance, signified in writing, the National Assembly shall not—
Provided that—
Provided that—
Provided that where it is not practicable for the polling to be held on the Tuesday in the third week of May, the polling shall be held on a day, within seven days from that Tuesday, appointed by the Electoral Commission; and provided further that, in the case of the elections to be held in 1999, the polling shall be held on a day, not later than 15th June, 1999, appointed by the Electoral Commission.
No law made by Parliament shall come into force until it has been published in the Gazette, but Parliament may prescribe that a law shall not come into force until some later date after its publication in the Gazette.
There shall be a President of the Republic who shall be Head of State and Government and the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force of Malawi.
There shall be a First Vice-President and, subject to section 80 (5), a Second Vice-President both of whom shall assist the President and who shall exercise the powers and functions conferred on the First Vice-President or the Second Vice-President, as the case may be, by this Constitution or by any Act of Parliament and by the President.
Provided that where the President was elected on the sponsorship of a political party, then he or she shall not appoint a Second Vice-President from that political party.
“I, ............. do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the functions of the high office of President (or Vice-President) of the Republic of Malawi, and that I will preserve and defend the Constitution, and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. So help me God.”
The President, First Vice-President and Second Vice-President shall receive such salary, allowance or pension as may, from time to time, be determined by Parliament in consultation with the President and shall have such adequate number of residences and personal staff, at State expense, as an Act of Parliament may prescribe.
If the First Vice-President dies or resigns from office, or where in accordance with section 87 the office is vacated through the incapacity of the First Vice-President for more than twelve months, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired period of that term by a person appointed by the President.
If at any time both the office of President and First Vice-President become vacant then the Cabinet shall elect from among its members an Acting President and Acting First Vice-President who shall hold office for not more than sixty days or, where four years of a Presidential term have expired, for the rest of that Presidential term.
Provided that—
Provided that—
Provided that two or more Government departments may be placed under the supervision of one Principal Secretary, and one government department may be placed under the supervision of two or more Principal Secretaries.
All Ministers shall be responsible to the President for the administration of their own departments.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General may be summoned by the Legal Affairs Committee of Parliament to appear before it to give account for the exercise of those powers.
Provided that the person holding that office may be appointed for such further terms, not exceeding five years, as the President considers appropriate.
The Judges of the High Court shall be such number of judges, not being less than three, as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament.
Provided that the jurisdiction of such courts shall be limited exclusively to civil cases at customary law and such minor common law and statutory offences as prescribed by an Act of Parliament.
A person holding judicial office shall not enter upon the duties of his or her office unless that officer has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance for the due execution of his or her office in such manner and form as may be prescribed by an Act of Parliament.
There shall be a Judicial Service Commission for the regulation of judicial officers and which shall have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred on it by this Constitution or, subject to this Constitution, by any Act of Parliament.
The Judicial Service Commission shall consist of—
The Judicial Service Commission shall have the authority to—
Provided that nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any person in judicial office who was the subject of any decision by the Judicial Service Commission to appeal to the High Court against that decision.
Provided that the President, after consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, may permit a Judge who has attained that age to continue in office for such period as may be necessary to enable him or her to deliver judgment or to do any other thing in relation to proceedings that were commenced before him or her before he or she attained that age.
Provided that the procedure for the removal of a judge shall be in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Provided that a law made by Parliament, to the extent that it alters the age at which a Judge shall vacate his or her office, shall not have effect in relation to a Judge after his or her appointment unless he or she consents to its having effect.
There shall be a public office known as the office of the Ombudsman which shall have such powers, functions and responsibilities as are conferred upon that office by this Constitution and any other law.
In the exercise of his or her powers, functions and duties the Ombudsman shall be completely independent of the interference or direction of any other person or authority, but shall otherwise be answerable to Parliament.
The Ombudsman shall have full powers to—
A person holding the office of Ombudsman shall—
Where the investigations of the Ombudsman reveal sufficient evidence to satisfy him or her that an injustice has been done, the Ombudsman shall—
The Ombudsman shall lay, each year, before the National Assembly a report which shall include a record of all complaints and applications to the office of Ombudsman, a record of the exercise of powers in relation to applications, of the remedies afforded to applicants in respect of grievances and shall also include a record of the general recommendations of the Ombudsman in respect of grievances.
There shall be a Human Rights Commission the primary functions of which shall be the protection and investigation of violations of the rights accorded by this Constitution or any other law.
The Human Rights Commission shall, with respect to the applications of an individual or class of persons, or on its own motion, have such powers of investigation and recommendation as are reasonably necessary for the effective promotion of the rights conferred by or under this Constitution, or any other written law but shall not exercise a judicial or legislative function and shall not be given powers so to do.
There shall be a Law Commission which shall have the power to review and make recommendations relating to the repeal and amendment of laws and which shall have such powers and functions as are conferred on it by this Constitution and any Act of Parliament.
The Law Commission shall consist of—
The Law Commission shall have the powers—
The Law Commission shall exercise its functions and powers independent of the direction or interference of any other person or authority.
There shall be a National Compensation Tribunal which shall entertain claims with respect to alleged criminal and civil liability of the Government of Malawi which was in power before the appointed day and which shall have such powers and functions as are conferred on it by this Constitution and an Act of Parliament.
Where a third party disputes a claim and has an interest in money or property that is the subject of a claim before the National Compensation Tribunal—
For the purposes of pursuing claims before the National Compensation Tribunal and criminal and civil proceedings against a private person within the meaning of section 142 (2), any statutory time limitation may be waived by the Tribunal or by a court if it seems to the Tribunal or the court equitable to do so.
Provided that the local government authorities shall stand dissolved at the end of five years following an election.
The Government shall be under a duty to ensure that there is adequate provision of resources necessary for the proper exercise of local government functions and to this effect shall allow a local government authority to keep such proportion of the revenue collected by that authority as shall be prescribed by the National Local Government Finance Committee; and any surplus of the revenue shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund, unless otherwise provided by an Act of Parliament.
There shall be a Malawi Police Service which shall be constituted by an Act of Parliament that shall specify the various divisions and functions of the Malawi Police Service.
Provided that nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any person who is the subject of a decision made by or on behalf of the Police Service Commission to appeal to the High Court or the right of any person with sufficient interest in such a decision to petition the High Court for judicial review of that decision.
Provided that—
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as derogating from the duty of the Police to uphold the rights and afford protection to all political parties, persons and organizations equally, without fear or favour, in accordance with this Constitution and subject to any law.
There shall be the Defence Force of Malawi which shall be the only military force constituted in Malawi and which shall be regulated in accordance with this Constitution and any other written law.
There shall be the Malawi Prisons Service which shall consist of all penal institutions, labour camps, special and secure schools and other institutions that are used to house, detain and rehabilitate persons sentenced to imprisonment in whatever form such imprisonment may take, but shall not include holding cells in police stations.
Provided that nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any person who is the subject of a decision made by or on behalf of the Prisons Service Commission to appeal to the High Court or the right of any person with sufficient interest in such a decision to petition the High Court for judicial review of that decision.
Provided that paragraph (a) shall not apply where the member in question still holds the office of Chief Commissioner for Prisons, in which behalf that person was appointed to the Prisons Service Commission.
No tax, rate, duty, levy or imposition shall be raised, levied or imposed by or for the purposes of the Government or any local government authority otherwise than by or under the authority of the law.
All revenues or other moneys raised or received for the purposes of the Government shall, subject to this Constitution and any Act of Parliament, be paid into and form one Fund, to be known as the Consolidated Fund.
Provided that this subsection shall not apply to any sums mentioned in section 183 (3).
Provided that no moneys shall be advanced from the Consolidated Fund under this subsection save on condition that they are repayable by the person or authority to whom or on behalf of whom they are advanced.
When the estimates of expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund, but not charged thereon, have been approved by the National Assembly, a Bill, to be known as an Appropriation Bill, shall be introduced in the Assembly providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums, under separate votes for the several heads of expenditure approved, to the purposes specified in the Bill.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the National Assembly and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill or in a motion or motions approving such expenditure.
The National Assembly may make provision under which, if it appears to the Minister responsible for Finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he or she may authorize the withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund of moneys for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier:
Provided that provision for any moneys so withdrawn shall be included, under the appropriate heads, in the Appropriation Bill.
There shall be a Civil Service Commission which shall have the powers and functions conferred upon it by this Constitution or any Act of Parliament and which shall consist of a chairperson, deputy chairperson and not less than six nor more than ten other members.
Provided that nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any person who is the subject of a decision made by or on behalf of the Civil Service Commission to appeal to the High Court or the right of any person with sufficient interest in such a decision to petition the High Court for judicial review of that decision.
Ambassadors, High Commissioners and such other principal diplomatic staff as shall be determined by an Act of Parliament shall be appointed by the President, subject to confirmation by the Public Appointments Committee which may require persons so appointed to answer questions as to their competence and financial probity.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of a member of the Civil Service Commission who is removed to appeal to the High Court against the decision to remove him or her.
Provided that the appointment of a person to act as a member of the Civil Service Commission in accordance with this subsection shall lapse on his or her appointment as a full member of the Commission in accordance with section 191 (1), or until the office in which he or she is acting is filled after the Public Appointments Committee has resumed sitting.
Provided that—
Where a law confers power to appoint a board, commission, council, committee or similar body and to appoint, elect or designate the chairperson thereof, no person shall be appointed, elected or designated as chairperson of more than one such board, commission, council, committee or similar body.
Parliament may amend this Constitution in accordance with this Chapter.
Subject to section 196, Parliament may amend those Chapters and sections of this Constitution not listed in the Schedule only if the Bill proposing the amendment is supported by at least two-thirds of the total number of members of the National Assembly entitled to vote.
The Republic of Malawi the organs of State and the offices referred to in this Constitution shall be defined and constituted in accordance with this Constitution.
This Constitution shall have the status as supreme law and there shall be no legal or political authority save as is provided by or under this Constitution.
Except in so far as they are inconsistent with this Constitution, all Acts of Parliament, common law and customary law in force on the appointed day shall continue to have force of law, as if they had been made in accordance with and in pursuance of this Constitution:
Provided that any laws currently in force may be amended or repealed by an Act of Parliament or be declared unconstitutional by a competent court.
For the purposes of this Constitution the first National Assembly after the date of commencement of this Constitution shall be composed of those persons successfully elected to the National Assembly in accordance with the Act of Parliament then in force for the election of members of the National Assembly.
For the purposes of this Constitution the first President after the date of commencement of this Constitution shall be the person successfully elected in accordance with the Act of Parliament then in force for the election of a person to the office of President.
The High Court shall have the same jurisdiction, powers and procedures as before the commencement of this Constitution, subject to amendment or repeal of such powers by an Act of Parliament in accordance with this Constitution.
All judgments or sentences pending execution shall be executed as if such judgments or sentences were ordered in accordance with this Constitution:
Provided that where the Constitution provides new grounds for appeal, any such appeal shall act as a stay of execution and the appeal shall be to the High Court.
Provided that where this Constitution has created an office with a different designation, but an equivalent function is exercised by an office existing at the time of the date of the commencement of this Constitution, a person occupying that office shall, from the date of commencement of this Constitution, have such powers, functions and designation as is prescribed for the equivalent office created by this Constitution.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, all lands and territories of Malawi are vested in the Republic.
The Government shall have title to all rights in property which are vested in the Government of Malawi on the date of the commencement of this Constitution save as otherwise provided by section 209 (2) and provided that the disposal of rights in property where title is vested in the Government shall be made in accordance with an Act of Parliament.
This Constitution of the Republic of Malawi may be cited as the Constitution.
In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires—
“appointed day” means 18th May, 1994, being the date on which this Constitution shall come into operation;
“age prescribed for retirement” is such age as may be prescribed in an Act of Parliament for the retirement of a person holding public office.
The sections of this Constitution listed in this Schedule and the entirety of the Schedule shall not be amended except in accordance with section 196.
SECTION
CHAPTER I
THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI
1. Malawi a sovereign State
2. National flag, etc.
3. National territory
4. Protection of the people of Malawi under this Constitution
5. Supremacy of this Constitution
6. Universal and equal suffrage
7. The separate status, function and duty of the executive
8. The separate status, function and duty of the legislature
9. The separate status, function and duty of the judiciary
CHAPTER II
APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION
10. Application of this Constitution
11. Interpretation
CHAPTER III
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES SECTION
12. Constitutional principles
13. Principles of national policy
CHAPTER IV
HUMAN RIGHTS
15. Protection of human rights and freedoms
16. The right to life
17. Genocide
18. Liberty
19. Human dignity and personal freedoms
20. Equality
21. Privacy
22. Family and marriage
23. Rights of children
24. Rights of women
25. Education
26. Culture and language
27. Slavery, servitude and forced labour
28. Property
29. Economic activity
30. The right to development
31. Labour
32. Freedom of association
33. Freedom of conscience
34. Freedom of opinion
35. Freedom of expression
36. Freedom of the press
37. Access to information
38. Freedom of assembly
39. Freedom of movement and residence
40. Political rights
41. Access to justice and legal remedies
42. Arrest, detention and fair trial
43. Administrative justice
44. Limitations on rights
45. Derogation and public emergency
46. Enforcement
CHAPTER V
CITIZENSHIP
47. Citizenship
CHAPTER VII
ELECTIONS
77. The franchise
CHAPTER IX
THE JUDICATURE
103. The independence and jurisdiction of the courts and the judiciary
111. Appointment of the judiciary
114. Remuneration
119. Tenure of judges
