Parliament may by law-
but a law altering the boundaries of a State shall not be passed without the consent of that State (expressed by a law made by the Legislature of that State) and of the Conference of Rulers.
Provided that this Clause shall not apply to the arrest or detention of any person under the existing law relating to restricted residence, and all the provisions of this Clause shall be deemed to have been an integral part of this Article as from Merdeka Day:
Provided further that in its application to a person, other than a citizen, who is arrested or detained under the law relating to immigration, this Clause shall be read as if there were substituted for the words “without unreasonable delay, and in any case within twenty-four hours (excluding the time of any necessary journey)” the words “within fourteen days”:
And provided further that in the case of an arrest for an offence which is triable by a Syariah court, references in this Clause to a magistrate shall be construed as including references to a judge of a Syariah court.
Provided that this Clause shall not apply where the woman applies to be registered as a citizen before the beginning of September 1965, or such later date as may be fixed by order of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, and is at the date of the application ordinarily resident in the States of Sabah and Sarawak.
Subject to Article 18, the Federal Government may, in such special circumstances as it thinks fit, cause any person under the age of twenty-one years to be registered as a citizen.
Subject to Article 18, any person of or over the age of eighteen years who was born in the Federation before Merdeka Day is entitled, upon making application to the Federal Government, to be registered as a citizen if he satisfies the Federal Government-
Subject to Article 18, any person of or over the age of eighteen years who is on Malaysia Day ordinarily resident in the State of Sabah or Sarawak is entitled, upon making application to the Federal Government before September 1971, to be registered as a citizen if he satisfies the Federal Government-
If any new territory is admitted to the Federation after Malaysia Day in pursuance of Article 2, Parliament may by law determine what persons are to be citizens by reason of their connection with that territory and the date or dates from which such persons are to be citizens.
shall be deemed voluntarily to claim and exercise a right available under the law of that place, being a right accorded exclusively to the citizens of that place.
Provided that a person shall not be deprived of citizenship under this Clause by reason of anything done before the beginning of October 1962, in relation to a foreign country, and before the beginning of January 1977, in relation to a Commonwealth country, notwithstanding that he was at the time a citizen.
Provided that this Clause shall not apply to any period of residence in any Commonwealth country before the beginning of January 1977.
Where a person has renounced his citizenship or been deprived thereof under Clause (1) of Article 24 or paragraph (a) of Clause (1) of Article 26, the Federal Government may by order deprive of his citizenship any child of that person under the age of twenty-one who has been registered as a citizen pursuant to this Constitution and was so registered as being the child of that person or of that person’s wife or husband.
and references in those provisions to the registration or naturalisation of a citizen shall be construed accordingly.
and references in those Articles to the registration or naturalisation of a citizen shall be construed accordingly.
Until Parliament otherwise provides, the supplementary provisions contained in Part III of the Second Schedule shall have effect for the purposes of this Part.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong shall keep and use the Public Seal of the Federation.
and may deliberate questions of national policy (for example changes in immigration policy) and any other matter that it thinks fit.
The executive authority of the Federation shall be vested in the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and exercisable, subject to the provisions of any federal law and of the Second Schedule, by him or by the Cabinet or any Minister authorised by the Cabinet, but Parliament may by law confer executive function on other persons.
and in any other case mentioned in this Constitution.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong shall be the Supreme Commander of the armed forces of the Federation.
but if an appointment is made while Parliament is dissolved a person who was a member of the last House of Representatives may be appointed but shall not continue to hold office after the beginning of the next session of Parliament unless, if he has been appointed Prime Minister, he is a member of the new House of Representatives, and in any other case he is a member either of that House or of the Senate.
The legislative authority of the Federation shall be vested in a Parliament, which shall consist of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and two Majlis (Houses of Parliament) to be known as the Dewan Negara (Senate) and the Dewan Rakyat (House of Representatives).
Provided that where a person who has already completed two or more terms of office as a member of the Senate is immediately before the coming into force of this Clause a member of the Senate, he may continue to serve as such member for the remainder of his term.
Every citizen resident in the Federation is qualified to be a member-
unless he is disqualified for being a member by this Constitution or by any law made in pursuance of Article 48.
A person shall not at the same time be a member of both Houses of Parliament, nor be elected to the House of Representatives for more than one constituency or to the Senate for more than one State, nor be both an elected and an appointed member of the Senate.
A member of either House of Parliament may resign his membership by writing under his hand addressed, if he is a member of the Senate, to the President of the Senate, and if a member of the House of Representatives, to the Speaker of that House.
Provided that this Article shall not be taken to prevent the practice of the House postponing a decision in order to allow for the taking or determination of any proceedings that may affect the decision (including proceedings for the removal of the disqualification).
Provided that failure to make any such appointment within the period specified in this Clause shall not invalidate any appointment made out of time:
Provided further that, if a casual vacancy in the House of Representatives is established on a date within two years of the date Parliament shall, in accordance with Clause (3) of Article 55, stand dissolved, such casual vacancy shall not be filled unless the Speaker notifies the Election Commission in writing that the numerical strength of the party that constitutes a majority of all the members of the House of Representatives is being affected by such vacancy, in which event such vacancy shall be filled within sixty days from the date of the receipt of that notification.
Provided that such disqualification shall not apply where such organisation or body carries out any welfare or voluntary work or objective beneficial to the community or any part thereof, or any other work or objective of a charitable or social nature, and the member does not receive any remuneration, reward, profit or benefit from it.
and the House shall, subject to Clause (3), transact no business while the office of Speaker is vacant other than the election of a Speaker.
Provided that paragraph (b) shall not have effect for the purposes of any of the following provisions of this Constitution, that is to say, Articles 43, 43A, 43B, 50 to 52, 54 and 59; and no person shall be entitled by virtue of that paragraph to vote on any matter before the House.
Provided that such disqualification shall not apply where such organisation or body carries out any welfare or voluntary work or objective beneficial to the community or any part thereof, or any other work or objective of a charitable or social nature, and the member does not receive any remuneration, reward, profit or benefit from it.
Parliament shall by law provide for the remuneration of the President and Deputy President of the Senate and the Speaker and Deputy Speakers of the House of Representatives, and the remuneration so provided for the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong may address either House of Parliament or both Houses jointly.
Parliament shall by law provide for the remuneration of members of each House.
being provision as respects which the Minister charged with responsibility for finance signifies that it goes beyond what is incidental only and not of a substantial nature having regard to the purposes of the Bill or amendment shall not be introduced or moved except by a Minister, and a Bill making any such provision shall not be introduced in the Senate.
the Bill shall, unless the House of Representatives otherwise directs, be presented to the Yang di-Pertuan Agong for his assent with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both Houses.
is certified by him as a money Bill.
In exercising the legislative powers conferred on it by this Constitution-
If any State law is inconsistent with a federal law, the federal law shall prevail and the State law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
The Legislature of a State shall have power to make laws with respect to any matter not enumerated in any of the Lists set out in the Ninth Schedule, not being a matter in respect of which Parliament has power to make laws.
In so far as any law made by Parliament or any regulation made in pursuance of such a law restricts the rights of a State or its residents to the use for navigation or irrigation of any river wholly within that State it shall not have effect in that State unless it has been approved by a resolution of the Legislative Assembly of that State supported by a majority of the total number of its members.
The executive authority of every State shall be so exercised-
Where any law or executive action relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List involves expenditure, such action shall be taken under this Constitution as will ensure that, unless otherwise agreed, the burden of that expenditure is borne-
Provided that the Federal Government shall not require the grant of any land reserved for a State purpose unless it is satisfied that it is in the national interest so to do.
Provided that if the value of the land has been increased by means of any improvement made (otherwise than at the expense of the State) while the land was reserved for federal purposes, the increase shall not be taken into consideration in determining the market value, rent or premium for the purposes of this Clause.
the Federation shall pay to the State such sum as may be just in respect of the excess.
In their application to any of the States not having a Ruler, Articles 83 to 87 shall have effect-
Provided that-
and shall, in accordance with the existing law, immediately declare as a Malay reservation, in a case where any land ceases to be a Malay reservation, any other land of a similar character and of an area not exceeding the area of that land.
except that where, in pursuance of Clause (1), a rate is imposed on any property by federal law which, but for this Article, might have been imposed by State law, no rate of the same kind shall be imposed by State law for any period for which the rate imposed by federal law is payable.
Provided that no provision shall be continued in force by virtue of this Clause if or in so far as it could not have been made by Act of Parliament.
In relation to the State of Sabah or Sarawak, Clause (4) of Article 76 shall not apply, nor shall paragraph (b) of Clause (1) of that Article enable Parliament to make laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned in Clause (4) of that Article.
but for each representative of the State of Sabah or Sarawak becoming entitled, by virtue of this Clause, to vote on questions before the National Land Council or National Council for Local Government, one shall be added to the maximum number of representatives of the Federal Government on that Council.
No tax or rate shall be levied by or for the purposes of the Federation except by or under the authority of federal law.
Provided that there may be separate statements of estimated receipts and estimated expenditure, and in that case it shall not be necessary for the statement of receipts to be so laid before the commencement of the year to which it relates.
The expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund but not charged thereon, other than expenditure to be met by such sums as are mentioned in Clause (3) of Article 99, shall be included in a Bill, to be known as a Supply Bill, providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified therein.
If in respect of any financial year it is found-
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House of Representatives and the purposes of any such expenditure shall be included in a supply Bill.
Parliament shall have power in respect of any financial year-
and the Federation may from time to time, after consultation with the National Finance Council, make grants out of the State Reserve Fund to any State for the purposes of development or generally to supplement its revenues.
In this Article “minerals” means mineral ores, mental and mineral oils.
Provided that during the absence or incapacity of that officer, or a vacancy in his post, those powers and duties shall be exercised and discharged by the Auditor General or such officer of his department as he may designate.
Clause (2) of Article 111 shall not restrict the power of the State of Sabah or Sarawak to borrow under the authority of State law within the State, if the borrowing has the approval of the Central Bank for the time being of the Federation.
Provided that on the first review the grant specified in subsection (2) of section 1 of the said Part IV shall not be brought into question except for the purpose of fixing the amounts for the ensuing five years.
Provided that this Clause shall not apply to the assignments under sections 4, 7 and 8, and shall not apply to that under section 5 or 6 until the second review.
Provided that such disqualification shall not apply where such organisation or body carries out any welfare or voluntary work or objective beneficial to the community or any part thereof, or any other work or objective of a charitable or social nature, and the member does not receive any remuneration, reward, profit or benefit from it.
For the election of members to the Legislative Assembly of a State the State shall be divided into as many constituencies as there are elected members, so that one member shall be elected for each constituency; and the division shall be made in accordance with the provisions contained in the Thirteenth Schedule.
No election to the House of Representatives or to the Legislative Assembly of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to the High Court having jurisdiction where the election was held.
A petition complaining of no return to the House of Representatives or the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to be an election petition and the High Court may make such order thereon as it may think fit for compelling a return to be made, but the failure to make a return within any period specified by Article 54 or 55 or by the corresponding provision of the Constitution of any State, as the case may be, shall not be a ground for declaring that a member has not been duly elected.
is entitled to vote in that constituency in any election to the House of Representatives or the Legislative Assembly unless he is disqualified under Clause (3) or under any law relating to offences committed in connection with elections; but no person shall in the same election vote in more than one constituency.
in accordance with the provisions of any law relating to elections.
Where in accordance with Clause (4) of Article 45 provision is made by Parliament for the election of Senators by the direct vote of electors-
and such inferior courts as may be provided by federal law and the High Courts and inferior courts shall have such jurisdiction and powers as may be conferred by or under federal law.
Provided that no such additional judge shall be ineligible to hold office by reason of having attained the age of sixty-six years.
Article 122B shall not apply to the transfer to a High Court, otherwise than as Chief Judge, of a judge of another High Court other than the Chief Judge; and such a transfer may be made by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, on the recommendation of the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, after consulting the Chief Judges of the two High Courts.
A person is qualified for appointment under Article 122B as a judge of the Federal Court, as a judge of the Court of Appeal or as a judge of any of the High Courts if-
The Federal Court, the Court of Appeal or a High Court shall have power to punish any contempt of itself.
The conduct of a judge of the Federal Court, the Court of Appeal or a High Court shall not be discussed in either House of Parliament except on a substantive motion of which notice has been given by not less than one quarter of the total number of members of that House, and shall not be discussed in the Legislative Assembly of any State.
The Yang di-Pertuan Agong may refer to the Federal Court for its opinion any question as to the effect of any provision of this Constitution which has arisen or appears to him likely to arise, and the Federal Court shall pronounce in open court its opinion on any question so referred to it.
the proportion, if any, of his remuneration payable by the Federation and the State or States concerned or, as the case may be, by each of the States concerned, shall, subject to federal law, be determined by agreement or, in default of agreement, by the Commission whose jurisdiction extends to him.
Provided that in its application to members of the services mentioned in paragraph (g) of Clause (1) of Article 132 this Clause shall not apply to any law which the legislature of any State, other than Penang and Malacca, may make to provide that all powers and functions of a Public Service Commission of such State, other than the power of first appointment to the permanent or pensionable establishment, be exercised by a Board appointed by the Ruler of such State:
And provided further that this Clause shall not apply to a case where a member of any of the services mentioned in this Clause is dismissed or reduced in rank by an authority in pursuance of a power delegated to it by a Commission to which this Part applies, and this proviso shall be deemed to have been an integral part of this Clause as from Merdeka Day.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to the following cases:
Provided further that for the purpose of this Article, where the service of a member of such a service is terminated in the public interest under any law for the time being in force or under any regulation made by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong under Clause (2) of Article 132, such termination of service shall not constitute dismissal whether or not the decision to terminate the service is connected with the misconduct of or unsatisfactory performance of duty by such member in relation to his office or the consequences of the termination involved an element of punishment; and this proviso shall be deemed to have been an integral part of this Article as from Merdeka Day.
All persons of whatever race in the same grade in the service of the Federation shall, subject to the terms and conditions of their employment, be treated impartially.
Provided that Parliament may by law provide for the exercise of such disciplinary control over all or any of the members of the police force in such manner and by such authority as may be provided in that law, and in that event, if the authority is other than the Commission, the disciplinary control exercisable by such authority shall not be exercised by the Commission; and no provision of such law shall be invalid on the ground of inconsistency with any provision of this Part.
Provided that such disqualification shall not apply where such organisation or body carries out any welfare or voluntary work or objective beneficial to the community or any part thereof, or any other work or objective of a charitable or social nature, and the member does not receive any remuneration, reward, profit or benefit from it.
and may once refer the recommendation back to the Commission in order that it may be reconsidered.
Provided that-
any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action is valid notwithstanding that it is inconsistent with any of the provisions of Article 5, 9, 10 or 13, or would apart from this Article be outside the legislative power of Parliament; and Article 79 shall not apply to a Bill for such an Act or any amendment to such a Bill.
Provided that-
shall be in the English language.
Provided that, if the Court and counsel on both sides agree, evidence taken in language spoken by the witness need not be translated into or recorded in English.
Where lands, buildings or hereditaments are occupied for public purposes by or on behalf of the Federation, a State or a public authority, the Federation, State or public authority shall not be liable to pay local rates in respect thereof but shall in aid of those rates make such contributions in respect thereof as may be agreed between the Federation, State or public authority, as the case may be, and the authority levying the rates or as may in default of agreement be determined by a tribunal consisting of the chairman of the Lands Tribunal established under Article 87, who shall preside, and two other members of whom each of the parties concerned shall appoint one.
Subject to any provisions of State law, arrangements may be made between any two States for the performance of any functions by the authorities of the one on behalf of the authorities of the other, and such arrangements may provide for the making of payments in respect of any costs incurred under the arrangements.
The provisions of Part IV of the Malaysia Act (which contains temporary and transitional provisions in connection with the operation of that Act) shall have effect as if embodied in this Constitution, and shall have effect notwithstanding anything in this Constitution as amended by that Act; and the provisions of this Constitution, and in particular Clause (1) of Article 4 and Articles 159 and 161E shall have effect in relation thereto accordingly.
“Act of Parliament” means a law made by Parliament;
“Attorney General” means the Attorney General of the Federation;
“Borrow” includes the raising of money by the grant of annuities or by entering into any arrangement requiring the payment before the due date of any taxes, rates, royalties, fees or any other payments or by entering into any agreement whereby the Government has to repay or refund any benefits that it has enjoyed under that agreement, and “loan” shall be construed accordingly;
“Casual vacancy” means a vacancy arising in the House of Representatives or a Legislative Assembly otherwise than by a dissolution of Parliament or of the Assembly;
“Chief Minister” and “Menteri Besar” both mean the president, by whatever style known, of the Executive Council in a State;
“Citizen” means a citizen of the Federation;
“Civil List” means the provision made for the maintenance of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, his Consort, a Ruler or Yang di-Pertua Negeri out of public funds;
“Commonwealth country” means any country recognised by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong to be a Commonwealth country; and “part of the Commonwealth” means any Commonwealth country, any colony, protectorate or protected state or any other territory administered by the Government of any Commonwealth country;
“Concurrent List” means the Third List set out in the Ninth Schedule;
“Debt” includes any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee, and “debt charges” shall be construed accordingly;
“Elector” means a person who is entitled to vote in an election to the House of Representatives or the Legislative Assembly of a State;
“Enactment”, where the expression occurs in the Eighth Schedule, means a law made by the Legislature of a State;
“Executive Council” means the Cabinet or other body, however called, which in the Government of a State corresponds, whether or not the members of it are Ministers, to the Cabinet of Ministers in the Government of the Federation (and in particular includes the Supreme Council in Sarawak);
“Existing law” means any law in operation in the Federation or any part thereof immediately before Merdeka Day;
“Federal law” means-
“Federal List” means the First List set out in the Ninth Schedule;
“Federal purposes” includes the purposes of the Federation in connection with matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and with any other matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws otherwise than by virtue of Article 76;
“Foreign country” does not include any part of the Commonwealth or the Republic of Ireland;
“Governor” (Repealed);
“Law” includes written law, the common law in so far as it is in operation in the Federation or any part thereof, and any custom or usage having the force of law in the Federation or any part thereof;
“Legislative Assembly” means the representatives assembly, however called, in the Legislature of a State (and in particular includes the Council Negri in Sarawak), but except in the Eighth Schedule includes also a Legislative Council, however called;
“Legislative Council” (Repealed);
“Legislature”, in relation to a State, means the authority having power under the Constitution of that State to make laws for the State;
“Local rates” (Repealed);
“Malay” means a person who professes the religion of Islam, habitually speaks the Malay language, conforms to Malay custom and-
“Member of the administration” means, in relation to the Federation, a person holding office as Minister, Deputy Minister, Parliamentary Secretary or Political Secretary and, in relation to a State, a person holding a corresponding office in the State or holding office as members (other than an official member) of the Executive Council;
“Merdeka Day” means the thirty-first day of August, nineteen hundred and fifty-seven;
“Office of profit” means any whole time office in any of the public services, and includes-
“Pension rights” includes superannuation rights and provident fund rights;
“Public authority” means the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, the Ruler or Yang di-Pertua Negeri of a State, the Federal Government, the Government of a State, a local authority, a statutory authority exercising powers vested in it by federal or State law, any court or tribunal other than the Federal Court, the Court of Appeal and High Courts, or any officer or authority appointed by or acting on behalf of any of those persons, courts, tribunals or authorities;
“Remuneration” includes salary or wages, allowances, pension rights, free or subsidised housing, free or subsidised transport, and other privileges capable of being valued in money;
“Rule Committee” (Repealed);
“Ruler”-
“State” means a State of the Federation;
“State law” means-
“State List” means the Second List set out in the Ninth Schedule;
“State purposes” includes, in relation to any State, the purposes of the State in connection with matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and with any other matters with respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws;
“Tax” includes an impost or a duty but does not include a rate levied for local purposes or a fee for services rendered;
“The Federation” means the Federation established under the Federation of Malaya Agreement, 1957;
“Written law” includes this Constitution and the Constitution of any State;
“Yang di-Pertua Negeri” means the Head of State in a State not having a Ruler.
The authority appointed under federal law for the purpose of revising laws may, with consent of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, authorize the printing of copies of this Constitution, including all amendments in force at the date of such authorization; and any copy of this Constitution so printed shall be deemed for all purposes to be a true and correct copy of the Federal Constitution.
Where this Constitution has been translated into the national language, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong may prescribe such national language text to be authoritative, and thereafter if there is any conflict or discrepancy between such national language text and the English language text of this Constitution, the national language text shall prevail over the English language text.
For the purposes of Clause (1) of Article 76-
The person holding office as Director of Audit immediately before Merdeka Day shall, as from that day, hold office as Auditor General on terms and conditions not less favourable than those applicable to him immediately before Merdeka Day.
A person who, under any provisions of this Part, holds office under the Federation by virtue of having been the holder of a corresponding office immediately before Merdeka Day may, until Parliament otherwise provides, perform his functions without taking the oath required in the case of other holders of that office.
Until Parliament otherwise provides, the remuneration payable to the persons holding the offices of Prime Minister and other Ministers shall be the same as was payable, immediately before Merdeka Day, to the Chief Minister and other Ministers of the Federation respectively.
Any agreement in force immediately before Merdeka Day relating to the proportion of the remuneration payable by the Federation and any State in respect of any such employment as is mentioned in Clause (2) of Article 133 shall continue in force until superseded by a new agreement or federal law.
No action, civil or criminal, shall be instituted against the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or the Ruler of a State in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by him in his personal capacity except with the consent of the Attorney General personally.
I ..... of ..... hereby declare on oath that I absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all loyalty to any country or State outside the Federation, and I do swear that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to His Majesty the Yang di-Pertuan Agong and be a true, loyal and faithful citizen of the Federation.
shall be treated as residence in the Federation.
shall not, except in the case of any period referred to in paragraph (c), with the consent of the Minister, be treated as residence in the Federation.
Kami ..... ibni ..... Yang di-Pertuan Agong bagi Malaysia bersumpah dengan melafazkan:
Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi;
maka dengan lafaz ini berikrarlah kami dengan sesungguh dan dengan sebenarnya mengaku akan taat setia pada menjalankan dengan adilnya pemerintahan bagi Malaysia dengan mengikut sebagaimana Undang-undang dan Perlembagaan Negeri yang telah disah dan dimasyhurkan dan yang akan disah dan dimasyhurkan di masa hadapan ini. Dan lagi kami berikrar mengaku dengan sesungguh dan dengan sebenarnya memeliharakan pada setiap masa Agama Islam dan berdiri tetap di atas pemerintahan yang adil dan aman di dalam negeri.
Kami ..... ibni ..... yang telah dilantik menjadi Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong bagi Malaysia bersumpah dengan melafazkan:
Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi;
dan dengan lafaz ini berikrarlah kami dengan sesungguh dan dengan sebenarnya mengaku akan taat setia pada menjalankan tanggungan kami yang telah ditetapkan dan yang akan ditetapkan pada suatu masa ke suatu masa yang ke hadapan ini oleh Undangundang dan Perlembagaan Negeri Malaysia.
We ..... ibni ..... Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia do hereby swear:
Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi;
and by virtue of that oath do solemnly and truly declare that We shall justly and faithfully perform (carry out) our duties in the administration of Malaysia in accordance with its laws and constitution which have been promulgated or which may be promulgated from time to time in the future. Further We do solemnly and truly declare that We shall at all time protect the Religion of Islam and uphold the rules of law and order in the Country.
We ..... ibni ...... being elected to be the Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia do hereby swear:
Wallahi; Wabillahi; Watallahi;
and by virtue of that oath do solemnly and truly declare that We shall faithfully perform (carry out) our duties as Timbalan Yang di-Pertuan Agong as laid down and as may from time to time be laid down by the laws and the Constitution of Malaysia.
“I, ....., having been elected (or appointed) to the office of ..... do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge the duties of that office to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Malaysia, and will preserve, protect and defend its Constitution.”
(NOTE-A judge of the Federal Court, other than the Chief Justice, a judge of the Court of Appeal or of a High Court or a judicial commissioner shall use the words “my judicial duties in that office” in place of the words “the duties of that office”.)
“I, ....., having been elected (or appointed) as a member of the House of Representatives (or the Senate) do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Malaysia, and will preserve, protect and defend its Constitution.”
“I, ....., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as ..... except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as such or as may be specially permitted by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong.”
but if an appointment is made while the Legislative Assembly is dissolved a person who was a member of the last Legislative Assembly may be appointed but shall not continue to hold office after the first sitting of the next Legislative Assembly unless he is a member thereof.
The Legislature of the State shall consist of the Ruler and one House, namely, the Legislative Assembly.
Every citizen of or over the age of twenty-one years who is resident in the State is qualified to be a member of the Legislative Assembly, unless he is disqualified for being a member by the Federal Constitution or this Constitution or by any such law as is mentioned in section 6 of the Eighth Schedule to the Federal Constitution.
A person shall not at the same time be a member of the Legislative Assembly for more than one constituency.
Provided that this section shall not be taken to prevent the practice of the Assembly postponing a decision in order to allow for the taking or determination of any proceedings that may affect the decision (including proceedings for the removal of the disqualification).
Provided that if a casual vacancy is established on a date within two years of the date the Legislative Assembly shall, in accordance with subsection (3), stand dissolved, such casual vacancy shall not be filled unless the Speaker notifies the Election Commission in writing that the numerical strength of the party that constitutes a majority of all the members of the Legislative Assembly is being affected by such vacancy, in which event such vacancy shall be filled within sixty days from the date of the receipt of that notification.
Provided that paragraph (b) shall not have effect for the purposes of the provisions of section 2 and no person shall be entitled by virtue of that paragraph to vote on any matter before the Assembly.
Provided that such disqualification shall not apply where such organisation or body carries out any welfare or voluntary work or objective beneficial to the community or any part thereof, or any other work or objective of a charitable or social nature, and the member does not receive any remuneration, reward, profit or benefit from it.
No tax or rate shall be levied by or for the purposes of the State except by or under the authority of law.
The heads of expenditure to be met from the Consolidated Fund of the State but not charged thereon, other than the sums mentioned in paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 14 (3) of the Eighth Schedule to the Federal Constitution, shall be included in a Bill, to be known as a Supply Bill, providing for the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the sums necessary to meet that expenditure and the appropriation of those sums for the purposes specified therein.
If in respect of any financial year it is found-
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a Supply Bill.
All persons of whatever race in the same grade of the service of the State, shall, subject to the terms and conditions of their employment, be treated impartially.
The Legislature shall by law provide a Civil List of the Yang di-Pertua Negeri, which shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund and shall not be diminished during his continuance in office.
“I, ..... having been appointed Yang di-Pertua Negeri of the State of ..... do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the State of ..... and to the Federation of Malaysia, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Federation of Malaysia and the Constitution of the State of .....”.
and until other provision is made as aforesaid, the number of elected members shall be the number specified in Article 171* [note - this article has been repealed] of the Federal Constitution.
and shall be based on the annual population projections of the State as determined by the Federal Government and calculated as of the last population census:
Provided that if the last census was taken one year before the beginning of the financial year, the grant for that particular year shall be based on the population as determined by that population census
(“net revenue” meaning for this purpose the revenue which accrues to the Federation, less the amounts received by the State in respect of assignments of that revenue).
2(56): Meaning of “month”- “month” means calendar month according to the Gregorian calendar.
2(61): Meaning of “person” and “party”- “person” and “party” includes any body of persons, corporate or unincorporate.
2(88): Definition of “subsidiary legislation”- “subsidiary legislation” means any Order in Council, proclamation, rule, regulation, order, notification, by-law or other instrument made under any Ordinance, Enactment or other lawful authority and having legislative effect.
2(94): Construction of masculine gender- words importing the masculine gender include females.
2(95): Construction of singular or plural- words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular
2(96) Meaning of “writing”- “writing” and expressions referring to writing include printing, lithography, typewriting, photography, and other modes of representing or reproducing words or figures in visible form.
2(98) Meaning of “year”- “year” means a year reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.
7: Forms- Save as is otherwise expressly provided, whenever forms are prescribed slight deviations therefrom, not affecting the substance or calculated to mislead, shall not invalidate them.
13: Effect of repeal- Where a written law repeals in whole or in part any other written law, then, unless the contrary intention appears, the repeal shall not-
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the repealing law had not been passed.
21: (Repealed).
23: General provisions with respect to power given to any authority to make subsidiary legislation- Where an Ordinance or Enactment confers power on any authority to make subsidiary legislation, such subsidiary legislation may at any time be amended, varied, rescinded or revoked by the same authority and in the same manner by and in which it was made.
28: Construction of provisions as to exercise of powers and duties-
1) Where a written law confers a power or imposes a duty, then, unless the contrary intention appears, the power may be exercised and the duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion requires.
2) Where a written law confers a power or imposes a duty on the holder of an office as such, then, unless the contrary intention appears, the power may be exercised and the duty shall be performed by the holder of the office for the time being or by a person duly appointed to act for him.
29: Power to appoint includes power to dismiss- Where a written law confers upon any person or authority a power to make appointments to any office or place, the power shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be construed as including a power to dismiss or suspend any person appointed and to appoint another person temporarily in the place of any person so suspended or in place of any sick or absent holder of such office or place:
Provided that where the power of such person or authority to make such appointment is only exercisable upon the recommendation or subject to the approval or consent of some other person or authority, such power of dismissal shall, unless the contrary intention appears, only be exercisable upon the recommendation or subject to the approval or consent of such other person or authority.
30: Construction of enabling words- Where a written law confers power on any person to do or enforce the doing of any act or thing, all such powers shall be understood to be also conferred as are reasonably necessary to enable the person to do or enforce the doing of the act or thing.
32: Official designation to include officer executing duties- When reference is made in any written law, instrument, warrant or process of any kind made or issued by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, or a Ruler or any body or person having authority under any written law to make or to issue the same to any public officer by the term designating his office, such officer shall include the officer for the time being executing the duties of such office or any portion of such duties.
33: Power of Yang di-Pertuan Agong to provide for execution of duties of public officer during temporary absence or inability-
1) Where by or under any written law any powers are conferred or any duties are imposed upon a public officer, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or, in the case of a public officer borne on the establishment of a State, the Ruler of that State, may direct that if, during any period, owing to absence or inability to act from illness or any other cause, such public officer is unable to exercise the powers or perform the duties of his office in any place under his jurisdiction or control, such powers shall be had and may be exercised and such duties shall be performed in such place by a person named by, or by a public officer holding the office designated by, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Ruler, as the case may be; and thereupon such person or public officer, during any period as aforesaid, shall have and may exercise the powers and shall perform the duties aforesaid subject to such conditions, exceptions and qualifications as the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or Ruler may direct.
2) Without prejudice to the provisions of subsection (1), when a substantive holder of any office is on leave of absence pending relinquishment of his office, it shall be lawful for another person to be appointed substantively in his place.
33C: Powers of a board, etc., not affected by vacancy, etc.- Where by or under any written law any board, commission, committee or similar body, whether corporate or unincorporate, is established, then, unless the contrary intention appears, the powers and proceedings of such board, commission, committee or similar body shall not be affected by-
35: (Repealed).
36: Computation of time- In computing time for the purposes of any written law, unless the contrary intention appears-
38: Provision when no time prescribed- Where no time is prescribed or allowed within which anything shall be done, such thing shall be done with all convenient speed and as often as the prescribed occasion arises.
39: Construction of power of extending time- Where in any written law a time is prescribed for doing any act or taking any proceeding and power is given to a court or other authority to extend such time, unless the contrary intention appears the power may be exercised by the court or other authority although the application for the same is not made until after the expiration of the time prescribed.
40A: Solicitor General to exercise powers of Attorney General-
1) Unless in any written law it is otherwise expressly provided, the Solicitor General may perform any of the duties and may exercise any of the powers of the Attorney General.
2) Where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong or any other person has lawfully delegated his powers to the Attorney General such delegation shall, unless otherwise expressly provided, be deemed to be delegation of powers to both the Attorney General and the Solicitor General.
42: Public officers- A reference in any written law to any public officer by the usual or common title of his office shall, if there be such an office customarily in the Federation or any State and unless the contrary intention appears, be read and construed as referring to the person for the time being holding or carrying out the duties of that office in the Federation or state, as the case may be.
44: Construction of references to laws- In any written law a description or citation of a portion of another written law shall, unless a contrary intention appears, be construed as including the word, section or other part mentioned or referred to as forming the beginning and as forming the end of the portion comprised in the description or citation.
46: (Repealed).
and the Commission shall take into consideration any representations duly made in accordance with any such notice.
the Commission shall cause a local enquiry to be held in respect of those constituencies.
Provided that it shall not be necessary to hold more than two local enquiries in respect of any such recommendations.
or stating that in their opinion no alteration is required to be made in order to give effect to the said principles.
Provided that the coming into force of any such Order shall not affect any election to the House of Representatives or a Legislative Assembly until the next dissolution of Parliament or the Assembly, as the case may be, occurring on or after the date.
