The National Anthem of Malta is "L-Innu Malti" opening with the words "Lil din l-Art helwa l-Omm li tatna isimha".
Provided that any person may address the Administration in any of the official languages and the reply of the Administration thereto shall be in such language.
Provided that Parliament may make such provision for the use of the English language in such cases and under such conditions as it may prescribe.
Subject to the provisions of sub-articles (7) and (9) of article 47 and of article 66 of this Constitution, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
The State recognises the right of all citizens to work and shall promote such conditions as will make this right effective.
The State shall promote the development of culture and scientific and technical research.
The State shall safeguard the landscape and the historical and artistic patrimony of the Nation.
Primary education shall be compulsory and in State schools shall be free of charge.
The State shall promote the equal right of men and women to enjoy all economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights and for this purpose shall take appropriate measures to eliminate all forms of discrimination between the sexes by any person, organisation or enterprise; the State shall in particular aim at ensuring that women workers enjoy equal rights and the same wages for the same work as men.
The minimum age for paid labour shall be prescribed by law.
The State shall provide for safeguarding the labour of minors and assure to them the right to equal pay for equal work.
The State shall encourage private economic enterprise.
The State shall provide for the protection and development of artisan trades.
The State recognises the social function of co-operatives and shall encourage their development.
The State shall facilitate the participation of Maltese citizens who live abroad in the political, social, economic and cultural life of Malta.
The provisions of this Chapter shall not be enforceable in any court, but the principles therein contained are nevertheless fundamental to the governance of the country and it shall be the aim of the State to apply these principles in making laws.
"British Protected Person" means a person who is a British protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act, 1948 or any other law of the United Kingdom replacing that Act;
"foreign country" means a country (other than the Republic of Ireland) that is not a part of the Commonwealth.
Repealed by Act III of 2000.
Repealed by Act III of 2000.
Repealed by Act III of 2000.
were renumbered by Act III of 2000.
Repealed by Act III of 2000.
Repealed by Act III of 2000.
Whereas every person in Malta is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed, sex, sexual orientation or gender identity but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely -
the subsequent provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to the aforesaid rights and freedoms, subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
Provided that if an interpreter is necessary and is not readily available or if it is otherwise impracticable to comply with the provisions of this sub-article at the time of the person’s arrest or detention, such provisions shall be complied with as soon as practicable.
and who is not released, shall be brought not later than forty-eight hours before a court; and if any person arrested or detained in such a case as is mentioned in paragraph (b) of this sub-article is not tried within a reasonable time, then, without prejudice to any further proceedings which may be brought against him, he shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or for proceedings preliminary to trial.
Provided that in special cases Parliament may, if it deems it appropriate so to act in the national interest, by law establish the criteria which are to be followed, including the factors and other circumstances to be taken into account, in the determination of the compensation payable in respect of property compulsorily taken possession of or acquired; and in any such case the compensation shall be determined and shall be payable accordingly.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Provided that nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this sub-article to the extent that the law in question imposes upon any person charged as aforesaid the burden of proving particular facts.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence.
Provided that nothing in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this sub-article by reason only that it authorises any court to try a member of a disciplined force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction or acquittal of that member under the disciplinary law of that force, so however that any court so trying such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into account any punishment awarded him under that disciplinary law.
Provided that no such requirement shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this article to the extent that the knowledge of, or the proficiency or instruction in, religion is required for the teaching of such religion, or for admission to the priesthood or to a religious order, or for other religious purposes, and except so far as that requirement is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Provided that provision may be made by law -
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
shall be deemed to be a citizen of Malta by virtue of article 3(1) or of article 5(1) of the Maltese Citizenship Act as in force upon the coming into force of the Maltese Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2000:
Provided that if the Minister responsible for matters relating to Maltese citizenship at any time by order declares that it is contrary to the public interest that a spouse as is mentioned in paragraph (c), or a widow or widower as is mentioned in paragraph (d), or a child over eighteen years of age as is mentioned in paragraph (c) or (d) is to be so deemed, or to continue to be so deemed, such spouse, widow, widower or child, as the case may be, shall thereupon cease to be deemed to be a citizen of Malta as aforesaid:
Provided further that the Minister responsible for matters relating to Maltese citizenship shall not be required to assign any reason for the issue of any order referred to in the immediately preceding proviso, and the decision of the Minister on any such order shall not be subject to appeal to or review in any court.
Provided that a person whose freedom of movement has been restricted by virtue of a restriction which is applicable to persons generally or to general classes of persons shall not make a request under this sub-article unless he has first obtained the consent of the Civil Court, First Hall.
Provided that paragraph (c) of this sub-article shall not apply to any law which makes any provision that is discriminatory, either of itself or in its effect by affording different treatment to different persons attributable wholly or mainly to their respective description by sex.
Provided that the Court may, if it considers it desirable so to do, decline to exercise its powers under this sub-article in any case where it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
"court" means any court of law in Malta other than a court constituted by or under a disciplinary law and in articles 33 and 35 of this Constitution includes, in relation to an offence against a disciplinary law, a court so constituted;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline -
"disciplined force" means -
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
Whenever the office of President is temporarily vacant, and until a new President is appointed, and whenever the holder of the office is absent from Malta or on vacation or is for any reason unable to perform the functions conferred upon him by this Constitution, those functions shall be performed by such person as the Prime Minister, after consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, may appoint or, if there is no person in Malta so appointed and able to perform those functions, by the Chief Justice.
A person appointed to or assuming the functions of the office of President shall, before entering upon that office, take and subscribe the oath of office set out in the Second Schedule to this Constitution. Any person appointed to the office of President under sub-article (1) of article 48 of this Constitution shall take the oath of office before the House.
There shall be a Parliament of Malta which shall consist of the President and a House of Representatives.
Provided that where -
and the proportion which the number of the elected candidates credited to the absolute majority party or to the relative majority party (as the case may be) represents in relation to the total number of elected members of the House of Representatives is less than the proportion which the number of votes credited to such candidates at the first count of all the votes represents in relation to the total of the votes credited at the same first count of all the votes to all the candidates of all the parties electing candidates, the number of the elected candidates of such party shall be increased (as the case may be) by a number of additional candidates in the circumstances as determined by and in accordance with the provisions of Part IV of the General Elections (Sorting of Ballot Papers, Casual Elections and Co-opting) Regulations in the Thirteenth Schedule to the General Elections Act and the Annex to such Schedule (hereinafter referred to as "the relevant regulations") as in force on 30th September 2007 or as subsequently amended or substituted in the manner provided in sub-article (3):
Provided further that:
and the proportion which the number of elected candidates credited to the minority party represents in relation to the total number of elected members of the House of Representatives is less than the proportion which the number of votes credited to all its candidates at the first count of all the votes represents in relation to the total of the votes credited at the same first count of all the votes to all the candidates of all the parties electing candidates, the number of the elected candidates of the minority party shall be increased by a number of additional candidates as determined by the relevant regulations as in force on 30th September 2007 or as subsequently amended or substituted in the manner provided in sub-article (3).
In any case as forseen in the first and second proviso to this sub-article, such persons shall be declared by the Electoral Commission to be elected to fill the additional seats created by the said provisos who, being candidates of the party which is to be credited with the additional seats, were credited by the Electoral Commission at the last count with the highest or next higher number of votes without being elected, irrespective of the division in which such highest or higher number of votes occurs.
Provided that in any such case the Speaker shall not be treated as a member of the House for the purpose of establishing the number of votes required to support a bill for any of the purposes of article 66 of this Constitution.
Subject to the provisions of article 54 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be elected as a member of the House of Representatives if, and shall not be qualified to be so elected unless, he has the qualifications for registration as a voter for the election of members of the House of Representatives mentioned in article 57 of this Constitution.
Provided that he shall not vacate his seat under the provisions of this paragraph if before becoming a party to the contract or before, or as soon as practicable after, becoming otherwise interested in the contract (whether as a partner with unlimited liability in a partnership or as a director or manager of a company) he discloses to the Speaker the nature of the contract and his interest or the interest of the partnership or company therein and the House of Representatives by resolution exempts him from the provisions of this paragraph;
Provided that the Speaker may, from time to time, extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so however that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
and for the purposes of this sub-article the provisions of sub-article(7) of article 66 of this Constitution shall apply as if references to the alteration to any of the provisions of this Constitution were references to the alteration of any law.
Provided that provision may be made by law whereby, if a person is unable, by reason of blindness, other physical cause or illiteracy to mark on his ballot paper, his ballot paper may be marked on his behalf and on his directions by some other person officially supervising the poll at the place of voting.
Provided that where a person is by reason of blindness unable to mark on his ballot paper, provision may be made by law requiring that at the request of any such person adequate and special means are to be provided which will enable that person to mark on his ballot paper independently and without the need of assistance.
Subject to the provisions of article 58 of this Constitution, a person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter for the election of members of the House of Representatives if, and shall not be qualified to be so registered unless -
Provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a person who is ordinarily resident in Malta but has not been resident in Malta as required by this paragraph by reason of service abroad in the public service, including service in the offices referred to in subarticle (3) of article 124 of this Constitution, or by reason of service abroad in, or as a member of, a disciplined force as defined in article 47 of this Constitution.
No person shall be qualified to be registered as a voter for the election of members of the House of Representatives if -
Provided that the Speaker shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a member of the House on a dissolution of Parliament, until the House first meets after that dissolution;
Provided that the Commission shall carry out such a review and, in accordance with the provisions of this article, alter the said boundaries whenever Parliament has made provision altering the number of electoral divisions; and in addition the Commission may at any time carry out such a review and, in accordance with the provisions of this article, alter the said boundaries to such extent as it considers desirable in consequence of the holding of a census of the population in pursuance of any law.
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as preventing the publication of any electoral register or any other requirements connected with the registration of voters from being carried out in accordance with the alteration, under any law for the time being in force in Malta, before that dissolution.
Provided that any such alteration may be made in such manner that the number of voters in that division is, at the time when the Commission carries out its review, greater or less than the electoral quota multiplied by the number of members to be so returned, but in no case by more than five per centum, in order to take account of geographical vicinity, differences in density of population and other relevant factors:
Provided further that the Island of Gozo and the islands of the Maltese Archipelago other than the Island of Malta shall together be treated as one electoral division and may not be divided between two or more electoral divisions.
Provided that the Electoral Commission shall by the 30th September 2007 review the boundaries of the electoral divisions to the extent necessary, and only to such extent, to make such adjustments to the said boundaries in order that the electoral divisions for the purpose of those elections shall comply with the provisions of sub-article (4) of this article; and these adjustments shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this article, come into force upon the publication of the register as correct on the 30th September, 2007.
Whenever the seat of any member of the House of Representatives becomes vacant the vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by or under any law for the time being in force in Malta.
Any question whether -
shall be referred to and determined by the Constitutional Court in accordance with the provisions of any law for the time being in force in Malta.
a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall not be passed in the House of Representatives unless at the final voting thereon in that House it is supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all the members of the House.
a bill for an Act of Parliament under this article shall not be presented to the President for his assent unless not less than three nor more than six months after its passage through the House in the manner specified in sub-article (2) of this article it has been submitted to the electors qualified to vote for the election of members of the House of Representatives and the majority of the electors voting have approved the bill.
No member of the House of Representatives shall be permitted to take part in the proceedings of the House (other than proceedings necessary for the purposes of this article) until he has taken and subscribed before the House the oath of allegiance:
Provided that the election of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker may take place before the members of the House have taken and subscribed such oath.
Except upon the recommendations of the President signified by a Minister, the House of Representatives shall not -
Save as otherwise provided by Parliament, every law shall be enacted in both the Maltese and English languages and, if there is any conflict between the Maltese and the English texts of any law, the Maltese text shall prevail.
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this sub-article for more than five years.
Provided that -
A general election of members of the House of Representatives shall be held at such time within three months after every dissolution of Parliament as the President acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, shall by proclamation appoint.
Wherever there shall be occasion for the appointment of a Prime Minister, the President shall appoint as Prime Minister the member of the House of Representatives who, in his judgment, is best able to command the support of a majority of the members of that House and shall, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint the other Ministers from among the members of the House of Representatives:
Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment to the office of Prime Minister or any other Minister while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a member of the House of Representatives immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as Prime Minister or any other Minister as if, in each case, such person were still a member of the House of Representatives, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at the beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a member thereof.
Provided that the President shall not do so unless three days have elapsed and he has decided not to dissolve Parliament under article 76 of this Constitution.
Provided that if the President considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers without that advice.
Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who, immediately before the dissolution, was a member of the House of Representatives may be appointed as a temporary Minister as if he were still a member of that House, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at the beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a member thereof.
Provided that the President shall act in accordance with his own deliberate judgment in the performance of the following functions-
Provided that -
The Prime Minister shall keep the President fully informed concerning the general conduct of the Government of Malta and shall furnish the President with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter relating to the Government of Malta.
Provided that if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who immediately before the dissolution was a member of the House of Representatives may be appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary as if he were still a member of that House, but any person so appointed shall vacate office at the beginning of the next session of Parliament if he is not then a member thereof.
A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and the oath of office set out in the Third and in the Second Schedule to this Constitution.
Provided that two or more departments of government may be placed under the supervision of one Permanent Secretary.
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall preclude an appeal being brought separately before the Court of Appeal in accordance with any law for the time being in force in Malta.
Provided that the office of a judge of the Superior Courts shall not, without his consent, be abolished during his continuance in office.
Provided that after the Prime Minister shall have availed himself of the power conferred upon him by this sub-article, thePrime Minister or the Minister responsible for justice shall:
Provided further that the provisions of the first proviso to this sub-article shall not apply in the case of appointment to the office of Chief Justice.
Provided that the President of the Chamber of Advocates shall not, before the expiration of a period of two years starting from the day on which he last occupied a post on the Committee or he was last a Committee member, be eligible to be appointed a member of the judiciary.
Provided that where the President of the Chamber of Advocates is not qualified to be appointed or to hold office as aforesaid the Chamber of Advocates shall nominate another advocate to sit on the Committee in his stead.
in the case of the Commissioner for Administrative Investigations he shall be substituted by the next most senior officer according to office in the Office of the Ombudsman and in the case of the President of the Chamber of Advocates he shall be replaced by the next most senior advocate according to office in the committee of the Chamber of Advocates.
Provided that the evaluation referred to in paragraph (d) shall be made by not later than sixty days from when the Committee receives the expression of interest and the advice mentioned in paragraphs (e) and (f) shall be given by not later than thirty days from when it was requested, or within such other time limits as the Minister responsible for justice may, with the agreement of the Committee, by order in the Gazette establish.
Provided that a person may be so appointed notwithstanding that he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
There shall be in and for Malta such inferior courts having such powers and jurisdiction as may be provided by any law for the time being in force in Malta.
Provided that after the Prime Minister shall have availed himself of the power conferred upon him by this sub-article, the Prime Minister or the Minister responsible for justice shall:
A judge of the Superior Courts or a magistrate of the inferior courts shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and such oath for the due execution of his office as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in force in Malta.
Provided that where such advice is not given within such time as the Commission may establish, the Commission may draw up such code or codes without the necessity of such advice;
Provided that where the Chief Justice fails to make a recommendation to the Minister, and in any case where the Minister deems it so appropriate, the Minister may advise the President on the matter, in any manner which, in the circumstances, he considers appropriate:
Provided further that in any such case he shall immediately publish in the Gazette, a notice of that fact together with the reasons therefor, and he shall make a statement of such fact in the House of Representatives not later than the second sitting immediately after he has so advised the President.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House of Representatives and the heads of any such expenditure shall be included in a supplementary appropriation bill.
Parliament may make provision under which, if the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting such expenditure as he may consider necessary to carry on the government of Malta until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Act, whichever is the earlier.
Provided that when a person who is not a member of the House of Representatives is elected to be the Speaker of the House of Representatives, he shall not be treated as a member of the House for the purpose of establishing the majority required by this sub-article.
shall be audited and reported upon annually by the Auditor General to the House of Representatives and for that purpose the Auditor General or any person authorised by him in that behalf shall have access to all books, records, returns and other documents relating to those accounts.
Provided that the Prime Minister may, acting on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission, delegate in writing, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the instrument of delegation, any of the powers referred to in this subarticle to such public officer or other authority as may be specified in that instrument.
Provided that such right of appeal shall be without prejudice to any such other right of appeal as may be provided under article 121(1) of this Constitution in respect of the exercise of any other power delegated under sub-article (1) of this article.
Provided that any procedure so prescribed shall be the same for all classes of public officers.
Provided that in respect of any person selected for appointment from the public service the Prime Minister shall, before giving his advice under the provisions of this article, consult with the Public Service Commission and, on being removed from the office to which he has been appointed under the provisions of this article, the person so appointed shall revert to the rank which he held in the public service immediately before such appointment.
Provided that the person appointed to any such office under the provisions of this article shall, on being transferred from that office, revert to the rank which he held in the public service immediately before his appointment to that office.
The question whether -
shall not be enquired into in any court.
The State shall adopt a system of local government whereby the territory of Malta shall be divided into such number of localities as may by law be from time to time determined, each locality to be administered by a Local Council elected by the residents of the locality and established and operating in terms of such law as may from time to time be in force.
A right of action for a declaration that any law is invalid on any grounds other than inconsistency with the provisions of articles 33 to 45 of this Constitution shall appertain to all persons without distinction and a person bringing such an action shall not be required to show any personal interest in support of his action.
"the appointed day" means 21st September 1964;
"the Cabinet" means the Cabinet established by article 79 of this Constitution;
"the Commonwealth" means Malta, any country to which article 23 of this Constitution applies and any dependency of any such country;
"the Consolidated Fund" means the Consolidated Fund established by article 102 of this Constitution;
"Constitutional Court" means the Constitutional Court established by article 95 of this Constitution;
"financial year" means the period of twelve months ending on the thirty-first day of December in any year or on such other date as may be prescribed by Parliament;
"Gazette" means the Malta Government Gazette or any other official journal substituted therefor published by order of the Government of Malta;
"House" means the House of Representatives established by article 51 of this Constitution;
"law" includes any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten law and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Malta" means the Island of Malta, the Island of Gozo and the other islands of the Maltese Archipelago, including the territorial waters thereof;
"oath of allegiance" means the oath of allegiance set out in the Third Schedule to this Constitution or such other oath as may be prescribed by Parliament;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Malta;
"public office" means an office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means the holder of any public office or of a person appointed to act in any such office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of subarticles (2) and (3) of this article, the service of the Government of Malta in a civil capacity;
"session" means the sittings of the House of Representatives beginning when it first meets after the commencement of this constitution or after the prorogation or dissolution of Parliament at any time and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued; `
"sitting" means a period during which the House of Representatives is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which the House is in committee;
"the Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean respectively the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker elected under article 59 of this Constitution.
Provided that -
Provided that, until such time as Parliament has made provision as aforesaid, the law applicable for the interpretation of this Constitution and otherwise in relation thereto shall be the law which was applicable for that purpose on the appointed day.
Criminal Code (Chapter 9)
Code of Police Laws (Chapter 10)
Code of Organization and Civil Procedure (Chapter 12)
Commercial Code (Chapter 13)
Civil Code (Chapter 16)
I................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will faithfully execute the office of President (perform the functions of the President) of Malta, and will, to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of Malta. (So help me God).
I ................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will faithfully and conscientiously perform my duties as (Prime Minister/Minister/Parliamentary Secretary) in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of Malta, without fear or favour. (So help me God).
I .................................. solemnly swear/affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the people and the Republic of Malta and its Constitution. (So help me God).
Antigua and Barbuda
Australia
Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belize
Botswana
Brunei Darussalam
Cameroon
Canada
Cyprus
Dominica
The Gambia
Ghana
Grenada
Guyana
India
Jamaica
Kenya
Kiribati
Lesotho
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mauritius
Mozambique
Namibia
Nauru
New Zealand
Nigeria
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tuvalu
Uganda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and Colonies
Vanuatu
Western Samoa
Zambia
Zimbabwe.
