WE, THE PEOPLE OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS, trusting in God, the Giver of our life, liberty, identity and our inherent rights, do hereby exercise these rights and establish for ourselves and generations to come this Constitution, setting forth the legitimate legal framework for the governance of the Republic.
We have reason to be proud of our forefathers who boldly ventured across the unknown waters of the vast Pacific Ocean many centuries ago, ably responding to the constant challenges of maintaining a bare existence on these tiny islands, in their noble quest to build their own distinctive society.
This society has survived, and has withstood the test of time, the impact of other cultures, the devastation of war, and the high price paid for the purposes of international peace and security. All we have and are today as a people, we have received as a sacred heritage which we pledge ourselves to safeguard and maintain, valuing nothing more dearly than our rightful home on the islands within the traditional boundaries of this archipelago.
With this Constitution, we affirm our desire and right to live in peace and harmony, subscribing to the principles of democracy, sharing the aspirations of all other peoples for a free and peaceful world, and striving to do all we can to assist in achieving this goal.
We extend to other peoples what we profoundly seek from them: peace, friendship, mutual understanding, and respect for our individual idealism and our common humanity.
Subject to the Constitution's limitations on the judicial power,
No soldier shall, in time of peace, be quartered in any house without the consent of the owner, nor in time of war but in the manner prescribed by law.
No person shall be imprisoned for debt; nor shall any person be imprisoned for failure to pay a fine assessed as punishment for a crime unless he has been afforded a reasonable time to make payment and has been found to have the means to do so.
No person shall be conscripted to serve in the armed forces of the Republic of the Marshall Islands except in time of war or imminent danger of war as certified by the Cabinet, and no person shall be conscripted if, after being afforded a reasonable opportunity to do so, he has established that he is a conscientious objector to participation in war.
All persons shall be free from unreasonable interference in personal choices that do not injure others and from unreasonable intrusions into their privacy.
The Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands recognizes the right of the people to health care, education, and legal services and the obligation to take every step reasonable and necessary to provide these services.
The Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands recognizes the right of the people to responsible and ethical government and the obligation to take every step reasonable and necessary to conduct government in accord with a comprehensive code of ethics.
The enumeration in this Constitution of certain rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the people.
from Ujelang ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Mili ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Arno ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Mejit ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Majuro ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Airok [Maloelap] ..... 1 Iroijlaplap
from Aur, Maloelap (excluding Airok), Wotje Utrik, and 1 Ailuk ..... Iroijlaplap
from Likiep ..... 1 Owner
The Council of Iroij shall have the following functions:
The compensation of members of the Council of Iroij shall be specifically prescribed by Act.
Provided that no deputy of a member shall perform the functions of Chairman unless there is no member of the Council available to perform those functions.
Kwajalein 3
Ailinglaplap 2
Arno 2
Jaluit 2
Jabat 1
Mili 1
Ebon 1
Lib 1
Namdrik 1
Maloelap 1
Wotje 1
Likiep
Ailuk 1
Aur 1
Namu 1
Wotho 1
Enewetak & Ujelang 1
Bikini & Kili 1
Rongelap 1
Mejit 1
Utrik 1
Lae 1
Ujae 1
Narikrik, Erikub, Jemo, Taka, Bikar, Bokak, Rongrik and Ailinginae shall each be included in the electoral district with which it is most closely associated, pursuant to the customary law or any traditional practice.
Provided that no person may, at any election, be a candidate in more than one electoral district.
Any questions that arise concerning the right of any person to vote at an election of a member or members of the Nitijela, or to be or to remain a member of the Nitijela, or to exercise the rights of a member, or concerning the conduct of any person in relation to any election of a member or members of the Nitijela, shall be referred to and determined by the High Court.
Provided that the President may, by writing signed by him, appoint a later date for the termination of any regular session.
Provided that, if in any calendar year there was, pursuant to Section 13 of this Article, a general election on or before the thirtieth day of April, the Nitijela shall automatically be dissolved on the thirtieth day of September in the third year after the year in which that general election was held.
The compensation of the President, the Ministers, the Speaker, the Vice-Speaker and the other members of the Nitijela shall be specifically prescribed by Act.
Any member of the Nitijela may introduce any Bill, or propose any motion for debate in, or present any petition to, the Nitijela; and any such Bill, motion or petition shall be considered and disposed of in accordance with this Constitution and the Rules of the Nitijela.
The Nitijela shall not proceed further than the first reading of any Bill or amendment to a Bill which, in the opinion of the Speaker, prescribes any qualification required for appointment as a judge, unless it has before it a report by the Judicial Service Commission as to whether such a qualification would be appropriate, and that report has been published.
Provided that no treaty shall be finally accepted and no ambassador or other head of diplomatic mission shall be appointed by the Cabinet without the approval of the Nitijela, signified by resolution;
Provided that no armed force shall be raised or stationed in the Republic in peacetime except by Act;
A member of the Public Service Commission may at any time resign his office by writing signed by him, addressed to the President; he shall not be removed or suspended from office except on the like grounds and in the like manner as a judge of the High Court or of the Supreme Court.
The compensation of the Chairman and other members of the Public Service Commission shall be specifically prescribed by Act.
In establishing and revising the conditions of employment in the Public Service, the factors to be taken into account shall include
Provided that the total amount of all sums issued and paid under this subparagraph in any financial year shall not result in an increase or decrease of more than 10 percent in the funds appropriated for any program area.
The appropriations made by the Appropriation Act or any Supplementary Appropriation Act shall lapse at the end of the financial year to which that Act relates, or at the end of such longer period as that Act may have prescribed in relation to a particular program area.
All debt charges for which the Republic of the Marshall Islands is liable shall be a charge on the General Fund.
The compensation of the Auditor-General shall be specifically prescribed by Act.
The Nitijela may make provision by Act
Any amendment of this Constitution shall become law only pursuant to this Article.
Amendments of this Constitution made pursuant to this Section shall originate in the Nitijela, and, subject to this Section, shall be considered and disposed of as if they had been proposed by Bill. Any such amendment must first be approved on the second and third readings by at least two-thirds of the total membership of the Nitijela, provided that at least 60 days shall have elapsed between the second and third readings. Thereafter the amendment shall be valid for all intents and purposes as part of this Constitution if duly certified by the Speaker as having been so approved by the Nitijela and also by a majority of the votes validly cast in a referendum of all qualified voters, such referendum to be held as prescribed by Act.
Provided that the amount payable pursuant to this paragraph shall not, in the case of a referendum, exceed the amount expended in conducting the voting at the last preceding general election, and, in the case of a Constitutional Convention, exceed 2 percent of the total amount of money appropriated by the Nitijela in the last preceding financial year.
Whenever a certificate of the Speaker is required by this Article as a precondition of the validity of an amendment, the Speaker shall give such a certificate upon being satisfied that the amendment has been approved in compliance with the requirements of this Constitution, and with any applicable law.
It shall be the duty of the Nitijela to make provision, at least once every ten years, for a report on the advisability of amending this Constitution, or of calling, or holding a referendum on the question of calling, a Constitutional Convention for the purpose of proposing amendments to this Constitution, and to publish that report.
Every Municipal Council, whether chartered or not, existing immediately before the effective date of this Constitution shall be a local government for the purpose of Article IX.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Constitution, and only for so long as their terms require, this Constitution shall have effect subject to any transitional provisions either made as described in Section 5 of this Article by the Republic of the Marshall Islands Nitijela, or made as described in Section 7 of this Article by or pursuant to resolution of the Constitutional Convention, for the purpose of enabling any institution or officer of the government of the Marshall Islands District of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands to function, as from the effective date of this Constitution, as an institution or officer of the Government of the Republic, or for the purpose of otherwise enabling this Constitution to function in an orderly manner as from its effective date.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Constitution, and only for so long as the Trusteeship Agreement extends to the Republic of the Marshall Islands as part of the law of the Republic, this Constitution shall have effect subject to any transitional provisions made as described in Section 5 of this Article by the Marshall Islands Nitijela for the purpose of enabling the government of the Republic under this Constitution to be conducted in conformity with the Trusteeship Agreement.
For all or any of the purposes referred to in Section 3 or Section 4 of this Article, the applicable transitional provisions shall be those made, before the effective date of this Constitution, by Act of the legislature of the Marshall Islands District of the Trustee Territory of the Pacific, known as the Marshall Islands Nitijela, confirmed by Order of the Secretary of the Interior of the United States.
For the purpose of achieving consistency between this Constitution and any provision of a Compact of Free Association between the Government of the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Government of the United States, and only for so long as that provision is in force, this Constitution shall have effect, notwithstanding any of its other provisions, subject to such provisions for that purpose as may be made by Act and be duly certified by the Speaker as having been approved by a majority of the votes validly cast in any plebiscite in which the people of the Republic also approve that Compact of Free Association.
If at any time before the effective date of this Constitution transitional provisions for all or any of the purposes referred to in Section 3 of this Article are adopted by or pursuant to a resolution of the Constitutional Convention, in the exercise of its responsibility to make adequate provision for the exercise of governmental functions, those transitional provisions shall have effect for all intents and purposes as part of this Constitution, and shall prevail over any inconsistent provision made as described in Section 5 of this Article.
In this Constitution,
unless the context otherwise requires
"Constitutional Convention", in relation to Article XIII, means the Constitutional Convention by which this Constitution was adopted; and, in relation to Article XII, has the meaning assigned to it in that Article;
"customary law" means any custom having the force of law in the Republic of the Marshall Islands; and includes any Act declaring the customary law;
"debt charges" include interest, sinking fund charges, the repayment or amortization of debt, and all expenditure in connection with the raising of loans on the security of the revenues of the Republic or the General Fund, and the service and redemption of the debt thereby created;
"existing law" means the law in force in the Marshall Islands immediately before the effective date of this Constitution; and includes any legislative or executive instrument having the force of law made or passed before that effective date and coming into force on or after that effective date;
"financial year" means the year beginning on 1 October or such other period of twelve months as may be prescribed by Act;
"general election" means an election of all the members of the Nitijela held pursuant to Section 12 or Section 13 of Article IV;
"joint committee" means a committee of members of the Council of Iroij and of the Nitijela, acting jointly;
"joint conference" means a joint conference between members of the Council of Iroij and members of the Nitijela;
"land rights" means any right in any land in the Republic under the customary law or any traditional practice;
"member of the Nitijela" means a person who has been elected to represent any electoral district and is holding office as a member of the Nitijela; and, unless the context otherwise requires, every reference in this Constitution to a member of the Nitijela shall, during any period between dissolution of the Nitijela and the first meeting of the Nitijela after a general election, be read as a reference to a person who was a member of the Nitijela immediately before the dissolution;
"municipal ordinance" means any ordinance duly enacted before the effective date of this Constitution by any municipality in the Republic, in exercise of powers granted under the laws of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands;
"parent" includes adoptive parent;
"President elect" means the member of the Nitijela who has been elected to the office of President pursuant to Section 3 of Article V, in the period between that election and the time when he is either appointed to office or his election ceases to have effect, pursuant to Section 4 of Article V;
"qualified voter" means a person having the right to vote in any electoral district at an election of a member or members of the Nitijela;
"total membership" in relation to the Nitijela, means the total number of members of the Nitijela provided for in or pursuant to Section 2 of Article IV;
"Vote of no confidence" means a motion of no confidence in the Cabinet made, voted upon and carried by a majority of the total membership of the Nitijela.
A reference to the holder of any office provided for in this Constitution includes any person who, for the time being, is performing the functions of that office pursuant to law.
In any case where this Constitution prescribes the number of the members of any body which shall constitute a quorum, that number shall include the member of that body who is for the time being presiding over its deliberations; and that member shall have the right to vote on any question.
The Marshallese and English texts of this Constitution shall be equally authentic, but in case of difference, the Marshallese text shall prevail.
Subject to the prior approval of this Constitution by a majority of the votes validly cast in a referendum, the effective date of this Constitution shall be May 1, 1979.
