WE, the plenipotentiary representatives of the people of the Republic of Moldova, members of the Parliament,
STARTING from the age-old aspirations of our people to live in a sovereign country, expressed by the proclamation of independence of the Republic of Moldova,
TAKING DUE ACCOUNT to the continuity of the Moldavian people statehood within the historical and ethnic framework of its growing as a nation,
STRIVING to satisfy the interests of citizens of a different ethnic origin, which together with the Moldavians, constitute the Republic of Moldova people,
CONSIDERING the rule of law, civic peace, democracy, human dignity, fundamental human rights and freedoms, the free development of human personality, justice and political pluralism as supreme values,
BEING AWARE of our responsibility and obligations towards the previous, present and future generations,
REASSERTING our devotion to overall human values and desire to live in peace and harmony with all world-wide peoples, in compliance with the unanimously acknowledged principles and norms of the international law,
We herewith adopt the Constitution of the Republic of Moldova, and declare it as the SUPREME LAW OF OUR SOCIETY AND STATE.
In the Republic of Moldova the legislature, the executive and the judiciary shall be separate and cooperate in the exercise of the assigned prerogatives pursuant to the provisions of the Constitution.
The Constitution of the Republic of Moldova shall be the Supreme Law of the State. No law or any other legal act, which contravenes the provisions of the Constitution, shall have legal force.
The capital of the Republic of Moldova is the city of Chisinau.
All citizens of the Republic of Moldova shall enjoy the rights and freedoms granted to them by the Constitution and other laws and, are assigned the duties provided for thereby.
Any individual person indicted for having committed an offence shall be presumed innocent, until found guilty on legal grounds during a public trial in which all guarantees necessary for his/her defence have been brought forward.
No one shall be sentenced for actions or drawbacks, which did not constitute an offence at the time they were committed. No punishment more severe than that applicable at the time when the offence was committed shall be imposed.
The State shall respect and protect the intimate, family and private life.
Meetings, demonstrations, rallies, processions or any other assembly shall be free and may be organized and conducted only peacefully and without the use of any weapon whatsoever.
Any person shall exercise his/her constitutional rights and freedoms in good faith, without any infringement of the rights and liberties of the others.
The protection of environment and the preservation of historical and cultural monuments shall represent a duty ascribed to each citizen.
Upon the proposal submitted by the Central Electoral Commission, the Constitutional Court shall rule on the validation or invalidation of the mandate of Parliament member, whenever electoral legislation has been transgressed.
The Parliament shall be vested the following basic powers:
The Parliament members may not be prosecuted or held legally responsible for their votes or opinions expressed in the exercise of their mandate.
The right to legislative initiate shall belong to the members of Parliament, the President of the Republic of Moldova, the Government and the People's Assembly of the autonomous territorial-unit of Gagauzia.
Laws shall be published in the "Monitorul Oficial" of the Republic of Moldova and shall come into force either at the date of their publication or the date specified in their wording. Unless published, the law is deemed nonexistent.
"I solemnly swear to devote all my personal strength and abilities to the prosperity of the Republic of Moldova, to abide by the Constitution and the laws of the country, to defend democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms, the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of Moldova"
[has been excluded]
[has been excluded]
The President of the Republic of Moldova shall also fulfil the following duties:
In the event the office of the President of the Republic of Moldova becomes vacant or the President has been dismissed, or finds himself/herself in temporary impossibility to discharge his/her duties, the interim office shall be devolved on the Parliament Speaker or the Prime Minister in the order of priority.
Should the person acting as interim President of the Republic of Moldova commit grave offences infringing upon the constitutional provisions, Article 89 paragraph (1) and Article 91 shall be applied.
The Government shall consist of a Prime Minister, a First Deputy Minister, Deputy Ministers, Ministers and other members established by organic law.
The office of the Government member shall cease in case of resignation, revocation, incompatibility or demise.
Justice shall be carried out in the name of law only by the courts of law.
Legal hearings in all courts of law shall be held in public. There shall be allowed the conduct of lawsuits in camera only in certain cases as provided for by law and in compliance with the rules of procedure.
The parties involved in a trial and the competent state bodies may lodge appeals against the sentences delivered by the law courts under the terms of law.
The observance of sentences and other final rulings handed down by the law courts, as well as the cooperation requested by the latter during the trial, and the execution of sentences and other final rulings shall be binding.
For the tenure of their mandate the judges of the Constitutional Court shall be irremovable, independent and shall obey only the Constitution.
The judges of the Constitutional Court must possess outstanding judicial knowledge, high professional competence and a length of service of at least 15 years in legal field, didactic or scientific activity in law.
The office of the Constitutional Court judge shall be incompatible with holding of any other remunerated public or private position, except for education and research activity.
The provisions enshrined in Article 25 paragraph (4) related to the term of detention in custody, should not affect, until 1 January 1995, the persons who have committed serious offences as foreseen by Article 71 under the Criminal Code.
Until the establishment of the Constitutional Court, all the cases stipulated by Article 135 of the present Constitution may be solved by the Supreme Court, upon the initiative brought forward by the Parliament.
Title VII Final and Transitory Provisions shall be considered a constitutive part of the present Constitution and shall regulate issues dealing with its coming into force.
