Meeting the age-old desires of our people, the armed struggle for national liberation, whose purpose was to liberate the land and Man, brought together all the patriotic sectors of Mozambican society in the same ideals of freedom, unity, justice and progress.
When national independence was won on the 25th of June 1975, the Mozambican people were given back their fundamental rights and freedoms.
The Constitution of 1990 introduced the democratic rule of law, based on the separation and interdependence of powers and on pluralism. It laid down the structural parameters for modernisation, making a decisive contribution to the beginning of a democratic climate that led the country to its first multiparty elections.
This Constitution reaffirms, develops and deepens the fundamental principles of the Mozambican State, and enshrines the sovereign nature of the democratic rule of law, based on pluralism of expression and partisan organisation and on respect for and the guarantee of fundamental rights and liberties of citizens.
The extensive participation of citizens in making this basic law conveys the consensus to strengthen democracy and national unity, which flows from the collective wisdom of the people.
The Republic of Mozambique is an independent, sovereign, democratic State of  social justice.
The Republic of Mozambique is a State governed by the rule of law, based on pluralism of expression and democratic political organisation and on the respect for and guarantee of fundamental human rights and freedoms.
The State recognises the different normative and dispute resolution systems that co-exist in Mozambican society, insofar as they are not contrary to the fundamental principles and values of the Constitution.
The Republic of Mozambique is a unitary State, which respects the principles of autonomy of local authorities (autarquias locais) in its organisation.
The State shall esteem national languages as cultural and educational heritage, and shall promote their development and increasing use as languages that convey our identity.
The official language in the Republic of Mozambique shall be Portuguese.
The fundamental objectives of the Republic of Mozambique shall be:
The symbols of the Republic of Mozambique shall be the national flag, emblem and anthem.
The Republic of Mozambique shall esteem the heroic struggle and age-old resistance of the Mozambican people against foreign domination.
The Republic of Mozambique shall maintain special ties of friendship and cooperation with the countries of the region, with countries whose official language is Portuguese and with countries that host Mozambican emigrants.
Persons who have met the requirements for nationality by origin but have not acquired such nationality by virtue of a choice made by their legal representatives, shall be Mozambican, provided that they are over eighteen years of age and that, within one year after attaining the age of majority, they personally declare that they wish to be Mozambican.
Mozambican nationality may be granted by means of naturalisation to the unmarried children, under eighteen years of age, of a citizen who has acquired Mozambican nationality.
A person who is adopted fully by a Mozambican national acquires Mozambican nationality.
Mozambican nationality shall be lost by a person who:
No other nationality of persons who are Mozambican nationals under the terms of the law of the Republic of Mozambique shall be recognised or have any legal effect in the Mozambican legal order.
The registration and proof of acquisition, loss and reacquisition of Mozambican nationality shall be regulated by law.
All citizens are equal before the law, and they shall enjoy the same rights and be subject to the same duties, regardless of colour, race, sex, ethnic origin, place of birth, religion, level of education, social position, the marital status of their parents, their profession or their political preference.
Men and women shall be equal before the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life.
Disabled citizens shall enjoy fully the rights enshrined in the Constitution and shall be subject to the same duties, except those which their disability prevents them from exercising or fulfilling.
All acts intended to undermine national unity, to disturb social harmony or to create divisions or situations of privilege or discrimination based on colour, race, sex, ethnic origin, place of birth, religion, level of education, social position, physical or mental ability, the marital status of one’s parents, profession or political preference, shall be punished in terms of the law
All citizens shall have the right to their honour, good name and their reputation, as well as the right to defend their public image and to protect their privacy.
The fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution shall not exclude any other rights provided for by law.
The constitutional principles in respect of fundamental rights shall be interpreted and integrated in harmony with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and with the African Charter of Human and Peoples Rights.
All individuals shall have the duty to respect and consider their fellow beings without any form of discrimination whatsoever, and to maintain relations with them aimed at promoting, safeguarding and strengthening respect, mutual tolerance and solidarity.
Every individual shall have the duty to:
All citizens shall have the right to freedom of assembly and demonstration, within the terms of the law.
In the Republic of Mozambique laws may have retroactive effect only where this is to the benefit of citizens and other legal persons.
Every citizen shall be entitled to contest those acts that violate their rights established in the Constitution and the laws.
Every citizen shall have the right of recourse to the courts against acts that violate their rights and interests recognised by the Constitution and the laws.
The Mozambican people shall exercise political power through elections of their representatives by universal, direct, equal and periodic suffrage and by secret ballot, through referenda on major national issues, and through the permanent democratic participation of citizens in the affairs of the nation.
Political parties shall be prohibited from using names containing expressions that are directly related to any religious denominations or churches, and from using emblems that may be confused with national or religious symbols.
Political parties shall be prohibited from advocating or resorting to armed violence in order to change the political or social order of the country.
All citizens shall have the right to present petitions, complaints and claims to the competent authority in order to demand the restitution of their rights violated or in defence of the public interest.
All citizens shall have the right not to comply with orders that are unlawful or that infringe on their rights, freedoms and guarantees.
The State recognises and guarantees, in accordance with the law, the right of inheritance.
All citizens shall have the right to medical and health care, within the terms of the law, and shall have the duty to promote and protect public health.
The economic and social order of the Republic of Mozambique shall aim to satisfy the basic needs of the people and to promote social wellbeing, and shall be based on the following fundamental principles:
Taxes shall be established and modified by law, and shall be set according to criteria of social justice.
The State shall promote knowledge, survey and valorisation of natural resources, and shall determine the conditions under which they may be used and developed subject to national interests.
In the Republic of Mozambique, industry shall be the driving force for the national economy.
The State shall recognise the contribution made by small scale production to the national economy, and shall support its development as a way of making good use of the capacity and the creativity of the people.
In granting titles for the use and enjoyment of land, the State shall recognise and protect rights acquired through inheritance or by occupation, unless there is a legal reservation or the land has been lawfully granted to another person or entity.
The financial system shall be organised in such a way as to guarantee that savings are formed, deposited and secure and that financial measures required for the country’s economic and social development are applied.
The Administrative Court and the Assembly of the Republic shall supervise the implementation of the State Budget, and the Assembly of the Republic shall appraise and decide on the General State Account after it has received the opinion of the Administrative Court.
The sovereign public offices are: the President of the Republic, the Assembly of the Republic, the Government, the courts and the Constitutional Council.
The sovereign public offices are established on the principles of separation and interdependence of powers enshrined in the Constitution, and shall owe obedience to the Constitution and the laws.
Central State offices are: the sovereign public offices, governmental bodies as a whole, and such institutions as are responsible for guaranteeing that national interests prevail and that a unitary State policy is implemented.
The state offices shall insure that they are represented at all territorial levels.
The President of the Republic may not, except where the Constitution expressly provides otherwise, perform any other public function, and in no event may he perform any private functions.
I do swear on my honour that I will respect and ensure respect for the Constitution, that I will faithfully carry out the task of President of the Republic of Mozambique, that I will dedicate all my efforts to the defence, promotion and consolidation of national unity, to human rights, to democracy and to the well-being of the Mozambican people, and I will ensure that justice is done for all citizens.
In no circumstances whatsoever shall the President of the Republic in office be subjected to preventive detention.
Normative acts of the President of the Republic shall take the form of presidential decrees, and other decisions shall take the form of presidential orders, and they shall be published in the Boletim da República.
In the performance of his functions, the Head of State shall have the power to:
In matters of national defence and of public order, the President of the Republic shall have power to:
In matters of international relations, the President of the Republic shall have power to:
The Council of State shall, in general, advise the President of the Republic on the performance of his functions whenever the President requests such advice, and it must, compulsorily, pronounce itself on:
The deputies shall have the following powers:
Deputies shall have the following duties:
Legislative acts of the Assembly of the Republic shall take the form of laws, and its other decisions shall take the form of resolutions, and they shall be published in the Boletim da República.
The Assembly of the Republic shall meet in ordinary session twice each year, and in extraordinary session whenever requested by the President of the Republic, by the Standing Commission or by at least one third of the deputies.
The President of the Assembly of the Republic shall have power to:
At the end of the legislative term or in the event of dissolution, the Standing Commission of the Assembly of the Republic shall remain in office until the founding session of the newly elected Assembly.
The Standing Commission of the Assembly of the Republic shall have power to:
The Government of the Republic of Mozambique is the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers shall be answerable to the President of the Republic and to the Assembly of the Republic on the implementation of domestic and foreign policy, and shall be accountable to them for its actions in the terms of the law.
The members of the Council of Ministers shall be accountable to the President of the Republic and to the Prime Minister for the enforcement of the decisions of the Council of Ministers within their areas of jurisdiction.
The members of the Government shall be bound by the Government Programme and by the decisions of the Council of Ministers.
The courts shall educate citizens and the public administration in the voluntary and conscientious observance of laws, thereby establishing a just and harmonious social community.
In matters brought before them for decision, the courts shall not apply laws or principles that are contrary to the Constitution.
Court decisions shall be binding on all citizens and other legal persons, and these decisions shall take precedence over the decisions of other authorities.
Judges in office may not undertake any other public or private activity, except for teaching, legal research or other activities of scientific, literary, artistic and technical dissemination or publication, with prior authorisation from the Superior Council of the Judiciary.
The Superior Council of the Judiciary shall be the body responsible for the management and discipline of the judiciary.
The Superior Council of the Judiciary shall have power to:
Courts martial with jurisdiction to try crimes of a strictly military nature shall be established during times of war.
The Supreme Court shall sit:
The law shall regulate the organisation and functioning of the Administrative Court, as well as all other matters related to its powers and jurisdiction.
Administrative Court judges in office may not undertake any other public or private activity, except for teaching, legal research or other activities of scientific, literary, artistic and technical dissemination or publication, with prior authorization from the Superior Council of the Administrative Judiciary.
The Public Prosecution Service shall comprise a magistracy, the Office of the Attorney General of the Republic and subordinate offices.
The Public Prosecution Service shall represent the State and defend such interests as the law may determine, and it shall control the legality and duration of detentions, shall conduct the institution of criminal proceedings, shall exercise penal authority, and shall ensure the legal defence of minors and absent or incapacitated persons.
Judges of the Constitutional Council in office may not undertake any other public or private activity, except for teaching, legal research, or other activities of scientific, literary, artistic and technical dissemination or publication, with prior authorisation from the relevant body.
The Ombudsman is an office established to guarantee the rights of citizens and to uphold legality and justice in the actions of the Public Administration.
The Ombudsman shall be elected by a two-thirds majority of the deputies of the Assembly of the Republic, for a term which shall be determined by law.
The offices and agents of the Public Administration shall be under a duty to collaborate with the Ombudsman in the exercise of his functions, should he so request.
The law shall determine all other aspects pertaining to the statute, the procedures, and the organisational structure supporting the Ombudsman.
The function of local State bodies shall be to represent the State at local level, in the administration and development of their respective territories, and they shall contribute to national integration and unity.
The State’s national defence and security policy shall seek to defend national independence, to preserve the sovereignty and the integrity of the country, and to guarantee the normal functioning of institutions and the security of citizens against any armed aggression.
The National Defence and Security shall have the following powers, in particular:
The organisation and functioning or the National Defence and Security Council shall be established by law.
The creation and dissipation of local authorities shall be regulated by law, and changes to the area of a particular local authority shall be preceded by consultation with its bodies.
Local authorities shall have their own regulatory powers, within the limits of the Constitution and of the laws and regulations issued by authorities with supervisory power over them.
The law shall guarantee the forms of organisation that the local authorities may adopt to further common interests.
The law shall govern the resignation and loss of office of elected members of local authority bodies.
When the circumstances giving rise to the declaration are of a less serious nature, a declaration of emergency shall be chosen, provided that the principle of proportionality shall be respected in all cases, and the duration and extent of the measures used shall be limited to what is strictly necessary for the prompt restoration of constitutional normality.
The duration of a state of siege or of emergency shall not exceed thirty days, which may be extended for the same period up to three times, if the reasons for the declaration persist.
The declaration of a state of siege or a state of emergency shall in no event restrict or suspend the right to life, the right to personal integrity, the right to civil capacity and to citizenship, the non-retroactivity of criminal law, the right of accused persons to a defence, and freedom of religion.
Under a state of siege or a state of emergency, the following measures restricting personal freedoms may be taken:
Detentions carried out under a state of siege or of emergency shall adhere to the following principles:
The declaration of a state of siege or a state of emergency must not affect the application of the Constitution in respect of the powers and the functioning of the sovereign public offices, or in respect of the rights and immunities of the respective office holders or members.
The Constitution may only be amended after five years have passed since the last amending legislation entered into force, except when a decision to assume  extraordinary amending powers has been passed by a majority of three quarters  of the deputies in the Assembly of the Republic.
No amendments to the Constitution shall be passed during a state of siege or state of emergency.
The words and the music of the national anthem shall be established by law, which shall be passed in accordance with article 280 (1).
The Capital of the Republic of Mozambique shall be the City of Maputo.
Changes to the national flag and the emblem of the Republic of Mozambique shall be established by law, which shall be passed in accordance with article 295 (1) within a period of one year of the date upon which this Constitution enters into force.
When the Constitution enters into force, the Constitutional Council shall remain in office with its current composition and shall assume the powers established in Title Ten.
The elections to the provincial assemblies, provided for in article 142 of the Constitution, shall be held before the year 2009.
Insofar as it is not contrary to the Constitution, previous legislation shall remain in force until it is modified or repealed.
The Constitution shall come into force on the day immediately following the day on which the results of the 2004 General Election are validated and proclaimed.
