Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is indispensable for freedom, justice and peace;
Whereas the said rights include the right of the individual to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, regardless of race, colour, ethnic origin, sex, religion, creed or social or economic status;
Whereas the said rights are most effectively maintained and protected in a democratic society, where the government is responsible to freely elected representatives of the people, operating under a sovereign constitution and a free and independent judiciary;
Whereas these rights have for so long been denied to the people of Namibia by colonialism, racism and apartheid;
Whereas we the people of Namibia--
are determined to adopt a Constitution which expresses for ourselves and our children our resolve to cherish and to protect the gains of our long struggle;
desire to promote amongst all of us the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Namibian nation among and in association with the nations of the world;
will strive to achieve national reconciliation and to foster peace, unity and a common loyalty to a single state;
committed to these principles, have resolved to constitute the Republic of Namibia as a sovereign, secular, democratic and unitary State securing to all our citizens justice, liberty, equality and fraternity,
Now therefore, we the people of Namibia accept and adopt this Constitution as the fundamental law of our Sovereign and Independent Republic.
provided further that Sub-Articles (aa), (bb), (cc) and (dd) hereof will not apply to children who would otherwise be stateless.
provided that no person who is a citizen of Namibia by birth or descent may be deprived of Namibian citizenship by such legislation.
The fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected and upheld by the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary and all organs of the Government and its agencies and, where applicable to them, by all natural and legal persons in Namibia, and shall be enforceable by the Courts in the manner hereinafter prescribed.
The right to life shall be respected and protected. No law may prescribe death as a competent sentence. No Court or Tribunal shall have the power to impose a sentence of death upon any person. No executions shall take place in Namibia.
No persons shall be deprived of personal liberty except according to procedures established by law.
Administrative bodies and administrative officials shall act fairly and reasonably and comply with the requirements imposed upon such bodies and officials by common law and any relevant legislation, and persons aggrieved by the exercise of such acts and decisions shall have the right to seek redress before a competent Court or Tribunal.
Every person shall be entitled to enjoy, practice, profess, maintain and promote any culture, language, tradition or religion subject to the terms of this Constitution and further subject to the condition that the rights protected by this Article do not impinge upon the rights of others or the national interest.
Whenever or wherever in terms of this Constitution the limitation of any fundamental rights or freedoms contemplated by this Chapter is authorised, any law providing for such limitation shall:
unless before the expiration of that period, it is approved by a resolution passed by the National Assembly by a two-thirds majority of all its members.
The Presidency shall consist of the President and the Vice-President, who shall be served by Ministers, Special Advisers and such other persons as the President may appoint as well as such staff members from the public service as may be appointed for that purpose in accordance with the laws regulating appointments in the public service.
Before formally assuming office, a President-elect shall make the following oath or affirmation which shall be administered by the Chief Justice, the Deputy-Chief Justice or a Judge designated by the Chief Justice for this purpose:
"I, .................................... do hereby swear/solemnly affirm,
That I will strive to the best of my ability to uphold, protect and defend as the Supreme Law the Constitution of the Republic of Namibia, and faithfully to obey, execute and administer the laws of the Republic of Namibia;
That I will protect the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the material and spiritual resources of the Republic of Namibia; and
That I will endeavour to the best of my ability to ensure justice for all the inhabitants of the Republic of Namibia.
(in the case of an oath)
So help me God."
Provision shall be made by Act of Parliament for the payment out of the State Revenue Fund of remuneration and allowances for the President, as well as for the payment of pensions to former Presidents and, in the case of their deaths, to their surviving spouses.
The Prime Minister shall be the leader of Government business in Parliament, shall co-ordinate the work of the Cabinet as head of administration, and shall perform other functions as may be assigned by the President or the Vice-President.
The President may appoint from the members of the National Assembly, including members nominated under Article 46(1)(b) hereof, and the National Council such Deputy-Ministers as he or she may consider expedient, to exercise or perform on behalf of Ministers any of the powers, functions and duties which may have been assigned to such Ministers.
Before assuming office, a Minister or Deputy-Minister shall make and subscribe to an oath or solemn affirmation before the President, the Vice-President or a person designated by the President for this purpose, in the terms set out in Schedule 2 hereof.
The President shall be obliged to terminate the appointment of any member of the Cabinet, if the National Assembly by a majority of all its members resolves that it has no confidence in that member.
The members of the Cabinet shall have the following functions:
All Ministers shall be accountable individually for the administration of their own Ministries and collectively for the administration of the work of the Cabinet, both to the President and to Parliament.
The legislative power of Namibia shall be vested in the National Assembly with the power to pass laws with the assent of the President as provided in this Constitution subject, where applicable, to the powers and functions of the National Council as set out in this Constitution.
The members of the National Assembly shall be representative of all the people and shall in the performance of their duties be guided by the objectives of this Constitution, by the public interest and by their conscience.
The election of members in terms of Article 46(1)(a) hereof shall be on party lists and in accordance with the principles of proportional representation as set out in Schedule 4 hereof.
Every National Assembly shall continue for a maximum period of five (5) years, but it may before the expiry of its term be dissolved by the President by Proclamation as provided for in Articles 32(3)(a) and 57(1) hereof.
In the case of an equality of votes in the National Assembly, the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker or the presiding member shall have and may exercise a casting vote.
Every member of the National Assembly shall make and subscribe to an oath or solemn affirmation before the Chief Justice, the Deputy-Chief Justice or a Judge designated by the Chief Justice for this purpose, in the terms set out in Schedule 3 hereof.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 57 hereof:
Save as provided in this Constitution, a simple majority of votes cast in the National Assembly shall be sufficient for the passage of any bill or resolution of the National Assembly.
There shall be a National Council which shall have the powers and functions set out in this Constitution.
Every member of the National Council shall make and subscribe to an oath or solemn affirmation before the Chief Justice, or a Judge designated by the Chief Justice for this purpose, in the terms set out in Schedule 3 hereof.
No person shall be qualified to be a member of the National Council if he or she is an elected member of a Local Authority, and unless he or she is qualified under Article 47(1)(a) to (e) hereof to be a member of the National Assembly.
Save as is otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions in the National Council shall be determined by a majority of the votes cast by members present other than the Chairperson, or in his or her absence the Vice-Chairperson or the member presiding at that session, who shall, however, have and may exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.
A decision of the Supreme Court shall be binding on all other Courts of Namibia and all persons in Namibia unless it is reversed by the Supreme Court itself, or is contradicted by an Act of Parliament lawfully enacted.
There shall be an Attorney-General appointed by the President in accordance with the provisions of Article 32(3)(i)(cc) hereof.
The powers and functions of the Attorney-General shall be:
The functions of the Ombudsman shall be defined and prescribed by an Act of Parliament and shall include the following:
The powers of the Ombudsman shall be defined by Act of Parliament and shall include the power:
For the purposes of this Chapter the word "official" shall, unless the context otherwise indicates, include any elected or appointed official or employee of any organ of the central or local Government, any official of a para-statal enterprise owned or managed or controlled by the State, or in which the State or the Government has substantial interest, or any officer of the defence force, the police force or the correctional service, but shall not include a Judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court or, in so far as a complaint concerns the performance of a judicial function, any other judicial officer.
The State shall actively promote and maintain the welfare of the people by adopting, inter alia, policies aimed at the following:
The State shall endeavour to ensure that in its international relations it:
The State shall, where it is reasonable to do so, grant asylum to persons who reasonably fear persecution on the ground of their political beliefs, race, religion or membership of a particular social group.
Foreign investments shall be encouraged within Namibia subject to the provisions of an Investment Code to be adopted by Parliament.
Land, water and natural resources below and above the surface of the land and in the continental shelf and within the territorial waters and the exclusive economic zone of Namibia shall belong to the State if they are not otherwise lawfully owned.
The principles of state policy contained in this Chapter shall not of and by themselves be legally enforceable by any Court, but shall nevertheless guide the Government in making and applying laws to give effect to the fundamental objectives of the said principles. The Courts are entitled to have regard to the said principles in interpreting any laws based on them.
and shall report thereon to the President.
Every Regional Council shall consist of a number of persons determined in accordance with the procedure provided for in Article 103(1) for the particular region for which that Regional Council has been established, and who are qualified to be elected to the National Council.
Members of Regional Councils are entitled to such remuneration and allowances and other benefits as determined in accordance with an Act of Parliament.
Regional Councils shall have the following powers:
The functions of the Public Service Commission shall be defined by Act of Parliament and shall include the power:
The President may remove the Chief of the Defence Force from office for good cause and in the public interest and in accordance with the provisions of any Act of Parliament which may prescribe procedures considered to be expedient for this purpose.
There shall be established by Act of Parliament a Namibian police force with prescribed powers, duties and procedures in order to secure the internal security of Namibia and to maintain law and order.
The President may remove the Inspector-General of Police from office for good cause and in the public interest and in accordance with the provisions of any Act of Parliament which may prescribe procedures considered to be expedient for this purpose.
There shall be established by Act of Parliament a Namibian correctional service with prescribed powers, duties and procedures.
The President may remove the Commissioner-General of Correctional Service from office for good cause and in the public interest and in accordance with the provisions of any Act of Parliament which may prescribe procedures considered to be expedient for this purpose.
The assets mentioned in Schedule 5 hereof shall vest in the Government of Namibia on the date of Independence.
This Constitution as adopted by the Constituent Assembly shall come into force on the date of Independence.
No repeal or amendment of any of the provisions of Chapter 3 hereof, in so far as such repeal or amendment diminishes or detracts from the fundamental rights and freedoms contained and defined in that Chapter, shall be permissible under this Constitution, and no such purported repeal or amendment shall be valid or have any force or effect.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 46 hereof, the Constituent Assembly shall be deemed to have been elected under Articles 46 and 49 hereof, and shall constitute the first National Assembly of Namibia, and its term of office and that of the President shall be deemed to have begun from the date of Independence.
This Constitution shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 7 hereof.
The President shall, in consultation with the leaders of all political parties represented in the National Assembly, appoint by Proclamation the first Chief of the Defence Force, the first Inspector-General of Police and the first Commissioner-General of Correctional Service.
All existing international agreements binding upon Namibia shall remain in force, unless and until the National Assembly acting under Article 63(2)(d) hereof otherwise decides.
Unless otherwise provided by this Constitution or Act of Parliament, the general rules of public international law and international agreements binding upon Namibia under this Constitution shall form part of the law of Namibia.
The laws set out in Schedule 8 hereof are hereby repealed.
This Constitution shall be called the Namibian Constitution.
"I,................................ do hereby swear/solemnly affirm that as a Judge of the Republic of Namibia I will defend and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Namibia as the Supreme Law and will fearlessly administer justice to all persons without favour or prejudice and in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Namibia.
(in the case of an oath) So help me God."
‘I, ................................................ do hereby swear/solemnly affirm,
That I will strive to the best of my ability to uphold, protect and defend as the Supreme Law the Constitution of the Republic of Namibia, and faithfully to obey, execute and administer the laws of the Republic of Namibia;
That I will protect the independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and the material and spiritual resources of the Republic of Namibia;
That I will not divulge directly or indirectly any matters brought before the Cabinet and entrusted to me under secrecy; and
That I will endeavour to the best of my ability to ensure justice for all the inhabitants of the Republic of Namibia, to deputise, assist and advise the President, and to perform the duties of my office and the functions entrusted to me by the President conscientiously and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. / I so affirm."
"I ............................................... do hereby swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of Namibia, hold my office as Minister/Deputy-Minister with honour and dignity, uphold, protect and defend the Constitution and faithfully obey, execute and administer the laws of the Republic of Namibia, serve the people of Namibia to the best of my ability, not divulge directly or indirectly any matters brought before the Cabinet and entrusted to me under secrecy, and perform the duties of my office and the functions entrusted to me by the President conscientiously and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. / I so affirm.”
"I,.................................... do hereby swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of Namibia and its people and I solemnly promise to uphold and defend the Constitution and laws of the Republic of Namibia to the best of my ability.
(in the case of an oath) So help me God."
The National Flag of Namibia shall be rectangular in the proportion of three in the length to two in the width, tierced per bend reversed, blue, white and green; the white bend reversed, which shall be one third of the width of the flag, is charged with another of red, one quarter of the width of the flag. In the upper hoist there shall be a gold sun with twelve straight rays, the diameter of which shall be one third of the width of the flag, with its vertical axis one fifth of the distance from the hoist, positioned equidistant from the top edge and from the reversed bend. The rays, which shall each be two fifths of the radius of the sun, issue from the outer edge of a blue ring, which shall be one tenth of the radius of the sun.
South-West Africa Constitution Act, 1968 (Act No. 39 of 1968)
Rehoboth Self-Government Act, 1978 (Act No. 56 of 1976)
Establishment of Office of Administrator-General for the Territory of South West Africa Proclamation, 1977 (Proclamation No. 180 of 1977 of the State President)
Empowering of the Administrator-General for the Territory of South-West Africa to make Laws Proclamation, 1977 (Proclamation No. 181 of 1977 of the State President)
Representative Authorities Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 8 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Whites Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 12 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Coloureds Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 14 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Ovambos Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 23 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Kavangos Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG.26 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Caprivians Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 29 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Damaras Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 32 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Namas Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 35 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Tswanas Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 47 of 1980)
Representative Authority of the Hereros Proclamation, 1980 (Proclamation AG. 50 of 1980)
Representative Authority Powers Transfer Proclamation, 1989 (Proclamation AG. 8 of 1989)
Government of Rehoboth Powers Transfers Proclamation, 1989 (Proclamation AG. 32 of 1989)
