We, the people of Nepal, in exercise of the sovereign powers inherent in us,
Embracing the sovereign right of the people and the right to autonomy and self-rule, by maintaining Nepal’s independence, sovereignty, geographical integrity, national unity, freedom and dignity,
Remembering the glorious history of historical peoples’ movements and armed struggles time and again and the sacrifice made by people for national interest, democracy, progressive change, and recognizing the martyrs, the disappeared citizens and the victims,
Ending all forms of discriminations and oppression created by the feudal, autocratic, centralized and unitary system,
Embracing multi-caste, multi-lingual, multi-cultural and diverse geographical specificities, by ending discriminations  relating to class, caste, region, language, religion and gender discrimination including all forms of racial untouchability, in order to protect and promote unity in diversity, social and cultural solidarity, tolerance and harmonious attitudes, we also express our determination to create an egalitarian society on the basis of the principles of proportional inclusion and participation, to ensure equitable economy, prosperity and social justice,
Expressing commitment to create the bases of socialism by adopting democratic norms and values, including peoples' competitive multi-party democratic governance system, civil liberty, fundamental rights, human rights, adult franchise, periodic elections, complete press freedom and an independent, impartial and competent judiciary, and the concept of rule of law,
NOW THEREFORE, in order to fulfill the aspirations for perpetual peace, good governance, development and prosperity through the medium of federal democratic republican system of governance, hereby promulgate this Constitution through the Constituent Assembly.
The sovereignty and state authority of Nepal are vested in Nepali people. The use of which shall be as provided for in this constitution.
Having multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious, multi-cultural characteristics with common aspirations of people living in diverse geographical regions, and being committed to and united by a bond of allegiance to national independence, territorial integrity, national interest and prosperity of Nepal, all the Nepali people collectively constitute the nation.
Explanation: For the purpose of this article, 'secular' means protection of religion and culture being practiced since ancient times and religious and cultural freedom.
All the mother tongues spoken in Nepal shall be the national language.
Provided that in case his/her father is proved to be a foreign citizen the citizenship of such a person shall be converted into naturalized citizenship as provided for by the federal law.
Provided that at the time of acquisition of citizenship, both his/her mother and father are citizens of Nepal such person born in Nepal may acquire citizenship of Nepal by descent.
According to this Constitution, a person who acquires citizenship of Nepal by descent may obtain citizenship certificate of Nepal in the name of his/her mother or father with gender identity.
Other provisions relating to the acquisition, re-acquisition and termination of citizenship shall be as provided for by the federal law.
A person who has acquired citizenship of a foreign country and who resides in a country other than a country member of South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and who previously himself or herself or his/her father or mother, grandfather or grandmother was a citizen of Nepal by descent or by birth and who later acquired the citizenship of a foreign country may be granted non-resident citizenship of Nepal allowing him/her to enjoy the economic, social and cultural rights as provided for by the federal law.
Record keeping of each citizen of Nepal along with his/her identity and other provisions regarding citizenship of Nepal shall be as provided for by the federal law.
Provided that,
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to bar the making of special provisions by law for the protection, empowerment or advancement of the women lagging behind socially and culturally, Dalits, Adibasi, Madhesi, Tharus, Muslims, oppressed class, backward communities, minorities, marginalized groups, peasants, laborers, youths, children, senior citizens, sexual minorities, persons with disability, pregnant, incapacitated and the helpless persons, and of the citizens who belong to backward regions and financially deprived citizens including the Khas Arya.
Explanation:  With reference to this Part and Part 4, “financially deprived” means the person having the income less than prescribed in the Federal law.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of laws to impose reasonable restriction on any act which may undermine the nationality, sovereignty, and indivisibility of Nepal, or the good relations between federal units, or jeopardizes the harmonious relations subsisting among different caste groups and tribes, or communities, or an act of treason, or defamation of social dignity of individuals through the publication and dissemination of false material, or  contempt of court, or material that incites criminal offence, or an act that is contrary to decent public behavior and morality, or disrespects labor, or incites untouchability or gender discriminations.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the making of Acts to regulate radio, television, online or the use of any other kind of digital or electronic equipment, printing press or other medium of communication.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a citizen of an enemy state.
Explanation:  For the use of this clause “legal practitioner” shall mean a person who has the legal right to represent any person in any court or office.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person in preventive detention or to a citizen of an enemy state.
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable to a citizen of an enemy state.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, “property” means all type of movable and immovable property and the word also includes intellectual property.
Provided that the state may impose tax on property and income of a person according to the norms of progressive tax.
Provided that this clause shall not be applicable to property acquired through illegal means.
Provided that it shall not be deemed to have hindered to make law to operate and protect a religious place or religious trust and to manage trust property and regulate land management.
Every citizen shall have the right to seek information on any matters of concern to her/him or the public.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to compel any person to provide information about which confidentiality is to be maintained according to law.
Except in circumstances provided by law, privacy in relation to the person, and their residence, property, documents, records, statistics and correspondence, and their reputation are inviolable.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent the enactment of a law requiring citizens to be engaged in compulsory service for public purposes.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, "laborer" means a worker or laborer who offers physical or mental work for an employer for remuneration.
Senior citizens shall have the right to special protection and social security from the State.
Economically poor, physically incapacitated and helpless person, helpless single women, persons with physical impairment, children, persons who cannot look after themselves and the citizens who belong to communities that are on the verge of extinction, shall have the right to social security as provided for by law.
No citizen shall be exiled.
There shall be right to constitutional remedy pursuant to the Articles 133 or 144 in course of implementation of rights granted in this part.
For the enforcement of the rights conferred in this Part, the State shall make legal provisions, as required, within three years of the commencement of this constitution.
Each person shall the following duties:
The State shall pursue the following policies:
It shall be the obligation of the State to maintain Nepal's independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, autonomy of Nepal, protecting and promoting fundamental rights and human rights, and to observe the directive principles of the State and gradually implementing the policies.
An annual report regarding the works of the government including the achievements made in the implementation of the directive principles, policies and responsibilities mentioned in this Part, shall be presented to the President. The President shall make arrangements to send such reports to the Federal Legislature through the Prime Minister.
There shall be a committee in the Parliament as provided for in law to monitor the progressive implementation of the directive principles, policies and responsibilities of the state as mentioned in this Part.
No question shall be raised in any court as to whether any of the provisions contained in this Part is implemented or not.
Powers relating any subject that are not mentioned in the list of powers of the federation, province or the local level entity, or in the concurrent/shared powers of federation and the province, or not stated in this Constitution, shall rest with the federation as residual powers.
Provided that with regard to the source that are not included in the concurrent/shared list or in any list at any level, it shall be as determined by the Government of Nepal.
The President shall cease to hold office under the following circumstances:
The Vice-President shall cease to hold office under the following circumstances:
The qualification of the Vice-President, election process, and other provisions regarding the term of office, shall be similar to that of the President.
While conducting election of the President and Vice-President under this constitution, the election shall be held so as to represent different gender or communities.
The President shall take the oath of office and secrecy before the Chief Justice, and, the Vice-President before the President, as provided for by law, before assuming the responsibilities of the office.
The remuneration and other benefits to the President and Vice-President shall be as determined by an Act, and until such Act is made, it shall be as specified by the Government of Nepal.
The form of governance of Nepal shall be a multi-party, competitive, federal democratic republican parliamentary system based on plurality.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article ‘minister’ stands for deputy Prime Minister, minister, minister of state and assistant minister.
Provided that, in the case of the death of the Prime Minister, the senior most minister shall continue to act as Prime Minister until a new Prime Minister is appointed.
The remuneration and benefits to the Prime Minister, deputy Prime Minister, minister, state minister, and assistant minister shall be as provided for by Federal Act. Until such an Act is formulated, it shall be as determined by the Government of Nepal.
The Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister and minister shall take the oath of office and secrecy before the President, and, the state minister and assistant minister before the Prime Minister according to Federal law.
The Prime Minister shall inform the President about the following:
There shall be a Legislature, called Federal Parliament, consisting of two Houses, namely the House of Representatives and the National Assembly.
Explanation:  For the purpose of this provision, Khas Arya means Chhetri, Brahmin, Thakuri and Sannyasi (Dasnami) community.
Provided that the same person shall not be a candidate in more than one electoral constituency at the same time.
Provided that after the commencement of this Constitution, arrangements shall be made by drawing lottery to retire one-third of the members on the expiry of two years, another one-third on the expiry of four years, and the final one-third on the expiry of six years.
Explanation: “Office of profit” in this section means any position, other than a political position which is to be filled by election or nomination, for which a remuneration or economic benefit is paid out of a government fund.  (2) No person shall be a member of both Houses at the same time.
Every member of the Federal Parliament shall, before taking part for the first time in the meeting of the parliament at its committees, have to take an oath as provided in law.
The seat of a Member of Parliament shall be vacant in the following circumstances:-
If a question arises as to whether a Member of Parliament is disqualified or has ceased to possess any of the qualifications set forth in Article 91 the final decision shall be made by the Constitutional bench of the Supreme Court.
Provided that, no more than one party is elected to the House of Representatives or does not seek to file its candidacy even when elected, nothing in this article shall bar from having Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the same party.
Provided that no more than one party is elected to the National Assembly or does not seek to file its candidacy even when elected, nothing in this article shall bar from having Chairperson and Vice chairperson from the same party.
Provided that the interval between two consecutive sessions shall not be more than six months.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, no resolution shall be presented for decision in either House of Parliament unless one-fourth of the total number of members of the concerned House are present.
A Minister shall be entitled to attend and take part in the proceedings and deliberations of any of the House of Parliament or its committees.
Provided that s/he shall not be entitled to vote in a House or committee of which s/he is not a member.
Both House of Federal Parliament shall have the power to transact its business notwithstanding any vacancies in the seats of its members, and no proceedings shall become invalid even if it is subsequently discovered that a person not entitled to take part in the proceedings of either House had participated therein.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions submitted for decision in either House of Parliament shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting. Normally, the member presiding shall not have the right to vote.
But he may exercise the right to cast decisive vote in case of a tie.
Provided that a no-confidence motion shall not be presented up to first two years of appointment of the Prime Minister and if a no-confidence motion fails, another motion cannot be tabled within a year of its failure.
If a person sits or votes in a meeting of either House of Parliament as a member without taking an oath pursuant to Article 88, or knowing that s/he is not qualified for membership in the House, s/he shall, on order of the person chairing the House, be liable to a fine of five thousand rupees for each day of such presence or voting. The fine shall be recovered as government dues.
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause and clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4), the word "House" shall mean and include the House of Representatives and National Assembly and shall also mean a joint sitting of Parliament or a meeting of the Joint Committee.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the arrest under any law of any member on a criminal charge. If any member is so arrested, the official making such arrest shall forthwith inform the person chairing the concerned House.
Provided that if the person so accused submits an apology to the satisfaction of the House, it may either pardon him or remit or commute the sentence imposed on him.
No discussion shall be held in either House of Federal Parliament on a matter which is under consideration in any court of Nepal, and about anything done by a Judge in course of performance of his duties.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall be deemed to bar the expression of opinion about the conduct of a Judge during deliberations on a motion of impeachment.
A Secretariat shall be established for the purpose of conducting the business of Parliament. Other matters related thereto shall be as determined by law.
The remuneration and benefits of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly and Chairperson of committees and members of Federal Parliament shall be as determined by the law. Until so determined it shall be as specified by the Government of Nepal.
The legislative powers of the Federal Parliament shall be as enumerated in Schedule-5, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9.
Provided that finance bill may be introduced in the House of Representatives only.
Provided that a bill shall not be deemed to be a Finance bill by reason only that it provides for the payment of any fees such as license fee, application fee, renewal fee, or it provides for imposition of any penalty or imprisonment.
Provided that, if a Bill is presented to the House of Representatives and is under consideration, or it is sent to National Assembly after passing it, but if the House of Representatives is dissolved while the Bill is still under consideration in the National Assembly, or if its tenure comes to an end, such Bill shall be considered not effective.
The member who introduces a Bill may withdraw the Bill with the approval of the House.
Provided that, in the case of a Finance Bill, the Speaker shall have to authenticate it as Finance Bill.
Provided that, every such Ordinance:
Explanation:  For the use of this clause, if the meetings of the Federal Parliament are held at different dates, the time shall be count from the later date of the meeting.
Except for the revenues of religious endowments, all revenues received by the Government of Nepal, all loans raised on the security of revenues, and all money received in payment of any loan made under the authority of any Act and any amount received by the Government of Nepal, unless any other arrangement is made by the Act, shall be credited to a Government Fund to be known as Federal Consolidated Fund.
No expenditure shall be incurred out of the Federal Consolidated Fund or any other federal government fund, other than the following:
Provided that matters relating to the Contingency Fund shall be governed in accordance with Article 124.
The expenditures related to the following matters shall be charged on the consolidated fund and the approval of the Federal Parliament shall not be necessary for such expenses:
The money required to meet the expenditure to be provided by an Appropriation Act shall be specified under appropriate heads in an Appropriation Bill.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, if owing to a local or national emergency due to either natural causes, a threat of external aggression or internal disturbances or other reasons, and it is impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or interest of the State to specify the details required under Clause (1) of Article 119, the Finance Minister may present a Vote of Credit Bill before the House of Representatives giving only a description of the proposed expenditure.
Matters relating to the transfer of money appropriated from one head to another and other financial procedures shall be regulated by Federal Act.
Explanation: The period worked as a judge of the Appellate Court before the commencement of this Constitution shall be regarded as the period to have worked in capacity of the High Court Judge for the purpose of this Clause.
However, this provision shall not apply in case of a declaration of a state of emergency due to severe economic breakdown.
The Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme Court will cease to hold office in the following situations:
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial Council, depute a Supreme Court Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry or to legal or judicial investigation or research for a specified period.
Provided that, except on the ground of absence of jurisdiction, the Supreme Court shall not, under this Clause, interfere with the internal affairs of the Federal Parliament and, the proceedings and decisions of the Federal Parliament concerning violation of its privileges and any penalties imposed thereof.
The Chief Justice or Judge of the Supreme Court, Judge of the Constitutional Court following their retirement shall not be allowed to plead any cases in any court, or involve in reconciliation or mediation business.
The Chief Justice shall have the ultimate responsibility to make the administration of justice effective of the Supreme Court and other courts under its jurisdiction or other judicial institutions.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in a condition of the Judicial Council removing her/him from office for being unable to perform duties of office due to reasons of physical or mental illness.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in situation of a declaration of state of emergency due to severe economic breakdown.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial Council, depute a High Court Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry or for a specified period to any legal or judicial investigation or research or to any other work of national concern.
Provided that except on the ground of absence of jurisdiction, the High Court shall not, under this Clause, interfere with the internal task and the proceedings and decision of the Provincial Assembly concerning violation of its privileges and any penalties imposed thereof.
A person who has retired as a High Court Judge can plead in in the Supreme Court and High Courts other than in the high courts and subordinate courts that she/he has served as the Judge.
The Chief Judge shall have the ultimate responsibility to make the administration of justice within the jurisdiction of the High Court effective, and for this purpose she/her may, subject to this Constitution and other laws, give necessary instructions to the High Court, other subordinate courts and judicial institutions.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in a situation of declaration of a state of emergency due to severe economic breakdown.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial Council, assign a District Court Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry or for a specified period to any legal or judicial investigation or research, or to works related to elections.
Provided that no specialized court, judicial institution or tribunal shall be constituted for the purpose of hearing a particular case.
Provided that the Government of Nepal shall make permanent appointments through new recruitments in gazetted post of federal judicial service of a person who is not in Federal Government Service or while making promotions from non-gazetted post of federal judicial service to gazette post of the same service, on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, the Public Service Commission shall conduct the open and internal practical examinations taken during appointments to gazetted post of judicial service.
The remuneration, benefits and conditions of service of the staffers of the Federal Judicial Services shall be as provided in Federal Act.
The formation of judicial service in the province and the remuneration, benefits and conditions of service of its staffers shall be as provided in the Federal law.
The remuneration, other benefits and conditions for service for government attorneys and other employees working under the Attorney General shall be as prescribed in Federal law.
Provided that the executive power of the Province shall be exercised by the Provincial Head in case of absence of the Provincial Executive in a State of Emergency or enforcement of Federal rule.
Provided that the Provincial Council of Ministers must coordinate with the Government of Nepal while exercising executive powers in areas mentioned in the concurrent list.
Any person with the following qualifications shall be eligible for the post of the Provincial Head:
The Provincial Head shall take her/his oath of office and secrecy before the President, pursuant to the Federal law.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article the word ‘Minister’ shall mean Minister, State Minister and Assistant Minister.
Provided that in the case of the death of the Chief Minister, the senior most Minister shall act as Chief Minister until a new Chief Minister is appointed.
The remuneration and other benefits of the Chief Minister, Minister, State Minister and Assistant Minister shall be as determined by an Act. Until so determined, they shall be as specified by the Government of Nepal.
The Chief Minister and Ministers shall take their oath of office and secrecy according to the law before the Provincial Head, and the State Ministers and Assistant Ministers shall take their oath of office and secrecy before the Chief Minister.
The Chief Minister shall inform the Provincial Head about the following subjects:
There shall be a unicameral legislature in a province which shall be called the Provincial Assembly.
Explanation: ‘Khas Arya’ shall mean Chettri, Brahman, Thakuri, Sanyasi (Dashanami) community.
Provided no one candidate shall stand in election from more than one constituency at a time.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, ‘office of profit’ means any position, other than a political position, filled by election or nomination for which remuneration or economic benefit is paid out of a Government Fund.
The members of the Provincial Assembly shall take the oath, as provided for in the law, before taking part for the first time in a meeting of the Assembly or a meeting of any of its Committee.
The seat of a member of the Provincial Assembly shall deemed to be vacant in the following circumstances:
If a question arises as to whether any member of the Provincial Assembly is disqualified or has ceased to posses any of the qualifications required by Article 178, the final decision shall be made by the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court.
Provided that if not more than one party is represented in the Provincial Assembly or candidacy has not been registered even with the presence of more than one party, it shall not obstruct the Speaker and Deputy Speaker being from the same party.
Provided that the period between the prorogation of a session and the commencement of new session shall not be more than six months.
Except as otherwise provided for in this Constitution, no resolution shall be presented for decision in any meeting of the Provincial Assembly unless one-fourth of the total number of members are present.
Any resolution submitted for decision in the Provincial Assembly shall be decided by a majority vote of members present and voting. The presiding member shall not have the right to vote.
Provided that in case of a tie the presiding member may exercise a casting vote.
Explanation: For this Clause and for Clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4), the word ‘Provincial Assembly’ shall also mean the meeting of the Committee of the Provincial Assembly.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to prevent the arrest of any member on a criminal charge under any law. If any member is so arrested, the authority making such arrest shall immediately inform the person chairing the Provincial Assembly.
Provided that if such a person submits an apology to the satisfaction of the Provincial Assembly, it may either pardon her/him or alter the sentence imposed on her/him.
Provided that a no-confidence motion shall not be moved until the first two years of her/his appointment as the Chief Minister and not before another year once a no-confidence motion fails.
The Minister, State Minister and Assistant shall be allowed to attend and take part in the business and deliberations of the Provincial Assembly and its Committee meetings.
Provided that the Minister, State Minister or Assistant Minister, who is not a member of the Provincial Assembly, shall not be allowed to vote in the Provincial Assembly meeting or its Committees and the Minister, State Minister or Assistant Minister, who is a member of the Provincial Assembly shall not be allowed to vote in the meeting of the Committee other than she/he is a member.
If any person who has not taken oath pursuant to Article 178 or does not hold necessary qualifications for membership of the Provincial Assembly attends the Provincial Assembly or its Committee meetings or votes in capacity of a member then the person presiding over the meeting shall order a fine of five thousand rupees against the person for every instance of such attendance or voting, and the penalty shall be recovered as government dues.
No discussion shall be held in the Provincial Assembly which could have an adverse impact in the judicial execution of a matter under consideration in any court of Nepal, and about anything done by a Judge in the course of performance of his or her judicial duties.
The proceedings of the Provincial Assembly shall be conducted notwithstanding any vacancies in its membership, and no proceedings shall become invalid even if it subsequently found that a person not entitled to take part in the proceedings participated.
The Provincial Assembly shall constitute committees or special committees according to the need and as provided for in its rules to manage the transaction of business of the Provincial Assembly.
The Provincial Assembly shall frame rules to conduct its business, maintain order during its meetings and to regulate the constitution, functions and procedures of, and for any other matters pertaining to, committees of the Provincial Assembly.
The remunerations and benefits of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and members of the Provincial Assembly shall be as provided for in the Provincial law. Until such a law is formulated, it shall be as determined by the provincial government.
The legislative powers of the Provincial Legislature shall be as enumerated in Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9.
Provided that a Bill shall not be deemed to be a Finance Bill by reason only that it provides for the levying of any charges and fees such as license fee, application fee, renewal fee or it provides for imposition of any penalty or imprisonment.
Provided that if the Provincial Assembly is dissolved or its term expires when any Bill is under consideration at the Provincial Assembly, such Bill shall be deemed to have lapsed.
A Bill may be withdrawn by the member introducing it with the approval of the Provincial Assembly.
Provided that in the case of a Finance Bill, the Speaker shall so certify stating that it is a Finance Bill.
Provided that every such Ordinance:
Except for the revenues of religious endowments, all revenues received by the Provincial Government, all loans raised on the security of revenues, and all the money received in repayment of any loan made under the authority of any Act and any amount received by the Provincial Government shall be credited to a Provincial Government Fund to be known as the Provincial Consolidated Fund.
No expenditure  shall  be  incurred  out  of  the  Provincial Consolidated  Fund or  any  other Provincial Government fund other than the following:
Provided that matters relating to the Provincial Contingency Fund shall be in accordance with Article 212.
The  expenditures relating  to  the  following  matters  shall  be  charged  on  the  Provincial Consolidated Fund and permission of the Provincial Assembly shall not be necessary for such expenses :
The money required to meet the expenditure to be provided by any Province Appropriation Act shall be specified under appropriate heads in an Appropriation Bill.
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, if owing to a  provincial emergency due to either  natural causes or a threat  of  external  aggression  or  internal  disturbances  or  other  reasons,  it is impractical or  inexpedient  in  view of the  security  or  interest of the Province to specify the details required under  Clause (1) of Article 207, the Finance  Minister of the Province may  present a Vote  of  Credit  Bill before the Provincial Assembly giving only a description of the expenditure.
Matters  relating  to  the  transfer  of money  appropriated  by Provincial Act from  one  head  to  another  and other financial procedures shall be regulated by Provincial Act.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, ‘Head and Deputy Head’ shall mean the Head and Deputy Head of the Village executive.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, ‘Mayor and Deputy Mayor’ shall mean the Head and Deputy Head of the Municipal executive.
The allocation and transaction of business of the Village Executive and Municipal Executive shall be carried out as set forth in rules approved by the Village Executive and Municipal Executive.
Other provisions relating to the local level executive other than those written in this part shall be as provided for in the laws drafted, in pursuant to this Constitution, by the Federal Parliament.
The Head and Deputy Head of the Village Executive and the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of the Municipal Executive shall carry out the transaction of business as Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly respectively.
The term of Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly shall be five years.
The operation of the Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly, meeting procedures, formation of Committees, condition of vacation of the post of members, the benefits entitled to members of the Village Assembly and Municipal Assembly and other arrangements of the Village Council and Municipality personnel and office shall be as provided for in the Provincial law.
Provided that if not endorsed by the Federal Parliament, such suspension or dissolution shall ipso facto cease to be effective.
No obstruction of any kind or levying of taxes or discrimination shall be made in the export and import of goods or services from one Province or local level to another Province or local level and in the transportation of any goods or services through the territory of any province or local level to another province or local level of Nepal.
Nothing contained in this Part shall have any effect on the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court as provided for in Article 137.
Provided that, nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to bar the appointment of a Commissioner to Chief Commissioner, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief Commissioner, her/his term of office shall be computed as to include her/his tenure as Commissioner as well.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in the event of a declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme financial breakdown.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any position of a political nature, or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinions or recommendations after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
Provided that this Clause shall not be applicable to any official in relation to whom this Constitution itself separately provides for such action, and to any officials with regard to whom other law has separately made special provision.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in the case of declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that, nothing in this Clause shall be a bar to appointment to any position of a political nature, or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinions or recommendations after carrying out studies or research on any subject.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Public Service Commission as Chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in the case of declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that, nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to appointment to any position of a political nature, or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinions or recommendations after carrying out studies or research on any subject.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Civil Service positions" shall mean positions of all services of the Government of Nepal, except Army and Federal Police or Armed Police, and such other services and positions as are excluded from the Civil Service or positions by Act.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Article, the words "corporate bodies" shall mean any corporate body including corporation, company, bank, committee, commissions to be formed under a Federal law, authority, academy, board, center, council and similar institution in which the Government of Nepal owns and controls more than fifty percent of the shares or assets, other than a University and Teachers Service Commission.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a commissioner of the Election Commission as Chief Commissioner thereof, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief Commissioner, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as Commissioner as well.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in the case of declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that, nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
The Government of Nepal, provincial government and local government shall provide necessary employees and extend other cooperation as may be required to perform the functions of the Election Commission in accordance with this Constitution.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Commission as chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in the case of declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Commission as chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that, this provision shall not be applicable in the event of the declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Commission as chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that, this provision shall not apply in the case of declaration of a State of Emergency due to extreme economic breakdown.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying out a study or research on any subject.
The National Women’s Commission may establish its offices in provinces as may be necessary.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Commission as chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that extreme economic breakdown has led to the state of emergency, this provision shall not be applicable.
Provided that, nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any position of a political nature, or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to the position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinions or recommendations.
The National Dalit Commission may establish its offices in provinces as may be necessary.
Provided that nothing in this Clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment of a member of the Commission as chairperson thereof, and when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, her/his term of office shall be computed so as to include her/his tenure as member as well.
Provided that extreme economic breakdown has led to state of emergency, this provision shall not be applicable.
Provided that, nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the appointment to any position of a political nature, or to any position which has the responsibility of making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to the position which has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinions or recommendations.
The National Inclusion Commission may establish its offices in provinces as may be necessary.
Federal Parliament shall review the Commissions constituted under this part after ten years of commencement of this Constitution.
Provided that in case election of the office bearers could not be held within five years due to situation arising out of special circumstance, there shall be no hindrance to make provision in the statute of a political party to hold such election within a period of six months.
Other provisions relating to formation, registration, operation and facilities of the political parties shall be as provided in Federal law.
Provided that, Article 16, section (c) and (d) of Article 17(2), Article 18, 19 (2), 20, 21, 22, 24, 26 (1), 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, 36 (1) and (2), 38, 39, 40 (2) and (3), 41, 42, 43, 45 and the right to constitutional remedy and right to habeas corpus related to Article 46 shall not be suspended.
Provided that, Clause (1) shall not be amended.
Provided that, In case the Provincial Assembly is not in place, the bill shall have to be endorsed or rejected within three months from the time the assembly comes into force and forward the information to the federal legislature.
The President may grant pardons to persons convicted, and suspend, commute, or reduce any sentence imposed by any court, judicial or quasi-judicial bodies or administrative officer or authority.
Provided that simple majority of the present members of House of Representatives can ratify, accede to, accept or approve ordinary type of treaty or agreement under section (a) and (d) that do not have wide, grave or long term impact on the nation
In case the position of the President and Vice-President of Nepal falls vacant at once under this constitution, the Prime Minister shall perform the responsibilities mandated to the President under this constitution.
The Government of Nepal shall review and revise, along with census of every ten years, the provisions regarding special rights of the women and Dalit community and its implementation and effectiveness based on human development index.
Appointment to the constitutional bodies and agencies shall be made based on the principles of inclusion.
Provided that, In case the posts have fallen vacant due to death or resignation, the recommendation for appointment has to be made so as to fulfill the vacant posts within a month from the day of position lying vacant.
Provided that in case of the person having obtained citizenship by naturalization, he/she shall have to have permanent domicile for at least ten years in Nepal and in case of the person having obtained citizenship by birth or person having obtained citizenship by naturalization under Article 11 (6), he/she shall have to have permanent domicile for at least five years in Nepal.
Provided that there shall be no hindrance to elect, nominate or appoint such a person to such position after lapse of a period of three months after he/she waives such permanent residential permission.
The chief and officials of the constitutional bodies shall be accountable and answerable to federal legislature. The respective committee of the House of Representatives may monitor and evaluate the functioning of the constitutional bodies including reports, other than that of the National Human Rights Commission, and issue necessary directives and suggestions.
Provided that, if the elections for the House of Representatives are to happen pursuant to this Constitution, the term of the transformed Legislature-parliament shall be until one day before the nominations are filed for the elections of House of Representatives.
Provided that no more than one such motion of vote of no confidence shall be moved to the Legislature Parliament against the same Prime Minister within six months.
Provided that laws inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of inconsistency, ipso facto, cease to operate, one year after first session of federal legislature, in accordance with this constitution.
Until the first session has started after conducting election of the Federal Parliament in accordance with this constitution, if any difficulty arises in connection with the implementation of this Constitution, the President, on the recommendation of the Council of Ministers, Government of Nepal, may issue necessary orders to remove such difficulties. Such orders shall be required to be presented immediately to the meeting of the Legislature-Parliament or Federal Parliament for endorsement.
The Interim Constitution of Nepal 2007 is hereby repealed.
Explanation:- The lines HI, RS, FE, ED, JG, OQ, JK and UV are imaginary. Similarly, the external and internal circles of the sun and the other arcs except the crescent moon are imaginary. These are not shown on the flag.
Woven from hundreds of flowers, we are one garland that's Nepali
Spread sovereign from Mechi to Mahakali.
A playground for nature's wealth unending Out of the sacrifice of our braves, a nation free and unyielding.
A land of knowledge, of peace, the plains, hills and mountains tall
Indivisible, this beloved land of ours, our motherland Nepal.
Of many races, languages, religions, and cultures of incredible sprawl
This progressive nation of ours, all hail Nepal.
[Image]
NOTE: This Coat of Arms can be made larger or smaller in size according to necessity. Color determined by Government of Nepal shall be used in it.
Province No. 1
Province No. 2
Province No. 3
Province No. 4
Province No. 5
Province No. 6
Province No. 7
