All persons in the Netherlands shall be treated equally in equal circumstances. Discrimination on the grounds of religion, belief, political opinion, race or sex or on any other grounds whatsoever shall not be permitted.
All Dutch nationals shall be equally eligible for appointment to public service.
Every Dutch national shall have an equal right to elect the members of the general representative bodies and to stand for election as a member of those bodies, subject to the limitations and exceptions prescribed by Act of Parliament.
Everyone shall have the right to submit petitions in writing to the competent authorities.
The right of association shall be recognized. This right may be restricted by Act of Parliament in the interest of public order.
Everyone shall have the right to inviolability of his person, without prejudice to restrictions laid down by or pursuant to Act of Parliament.
No offence shall be punishable unless it was an offence under the law at the time it was committed.
No one may be prevented against his will from being heard by the courts to which he is entitled to apply under the law.
It shall be the concern of the authorities to keep the country habitable and to protect and improve the environment.
The title to the Throne shall be hereditary and shall vest in the legitimate descendants of King William I, Prince of Orange-Nassau.
On the death of the King, the title to the Throne shall pass by hereditary succession to the King's legitimate descendants in order of seniority, the same rule governing succession by the issue of descendants who predecease the King. If the King has no descendants, the title to the Throne shall pass in the same way to the legitimate descendants of the King's parent and then of his grandparent who are in the line of succession but are not further removed from the deceased King than the third degree of consanguinity.
For the purposes of hereditary succession, the child of a woman pregnant at the moment of the death of the King shall be deemed already born. If it is stillborn it shall be deemed to have never existed.
Hereditary succession to the Throne in the event of abdication shall take place according to the rules set out in the above articles. Children born after an abdication and their descendants shall be excluded from the hereditary succession.
Upon assuming the royal prerogative the King shall be sworn in and inaugurated as soon as possible in the capital city, Amsterdam, at a public and joint session of the two Houses of the States General. The King shall swear or promise allegiance to the Constitution and that he will faithfully discharge his duties. Specific rules shall be laid down by Act of Parliament.
The King shall not exercise the royal prerogative before attaining the age of eighteen.
Parental responsibility for and guardianship of a King who is a minor, and the supervision thereof, shall be regulated by Act of Parliament. The two Houses of the States General shall meet in joint session to consider and decide upon the matter.
The King may temporarily relinquish the exercise of the royal prerogative and resume the exercise thereof pursuant to Act of Parliament. The relevant Bill shall be presented by or on behalf of the King. The two Houses of the States General shall consider and decide upon the matter in joint session.
The royal prerogative shall be exercised by the Council of State until such time as alternative provision is made for the exercise of such power.
Membership of the Royal House shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
The King shall organize his Household, taking due account of the public interest.
The Prime Minister and the other Ministers shall be appointed and dismissed by Royal Decree.
All Acts of Parliament and Royal Decrees shall be signed by the King and by one or more Ministers or State Secretaries.
The Royal Decree appointing the Prime Minister shall be countersigned by the latter. Royal Decrees appointing or dismissing Ministers and State Secretaries shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister.
Upon accepting office Ministers and State Secretaries shall swear an oath or make an affirmation and promise in the presence of the King, in the manner prescribed by Act of Parliament, that they have not done anything which may legally debar them from holding office, and shall also swear or promise allegiance to the Constitution and that they will faithfully discharge their duties.
The States General shall represent the entire people of the Netherlands.
The members of the Upper House shall be chosen by the members of the provincial councils. The election shall take place not more than three months after the election of the members of the provincial councils except in the event of the dissolution of the House.
To be eligible for membership of the States General, a person must be a Dutch national, must have attained the age of eighteen years and must not have been disqualified from voting.
The temporary replacement of a member of the States General during pregnancy and maternity leave or during illness shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
Each House shall examine the credentials of its newly appointed members and shall decide with due reference to rules to be established by Act of Parliament any disputes arising in connection with the credentials or the election.
All other matters pertaining to the right to vote and to elections shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
Upon accepting office members of the Houses shall swear an oath or make an affirmation and promise before the House in the manner prescribed by Act of Parliament that they have not done anything which may legally debar them from holding office, and shall also swear or promise allegiance to the Constitution and that they will faithfully discharge their duties.
The Speaker of the Upper House shall preside when the two Houses meet in joint session.
Financial remuneration for members and former members of the States General and their dependants shall be regulated by Act of Parliament. The Houses may pass a Bill on the matter only if at least two-thirds of the votes cast are in favor.
A statement of the policy to be pursued by the Government shall be given by or on behalf of the King before a joint session of the two Houses of the States General that shall be held every year on the third Tuesday in September or on such earlier date as may be prescribed by Act of Parliament.
Ministers and State Secretaries shall provide, orally or in writing, the Houses either separately or in joint session with any information requested by one or more members, provided that the provision of such information does not conflict with the interests of the State.
The two Houses shall jointly and separately have the right of inquiry (enquête) to be regulated by Act of Parliament.
Members of the States General, Ministers, State Secretaries and other persons taking part in deliberations may not be prosecuted or otherwise held liable in law for anything they say during the sittings of the States General or of its committees or for anything they submit to them in writing.
Each House of the States General and the two Houses in joint session shall draw up rules of procedure.
The Court of Audit (Algemene Rekenkamer) shall be responsible for examining the State's revenues and expenditures.
Acts of Parliament shall be enacted jointly by the Government and the States General.
Bills presented by or on behalf of the King shall be sent to the Lower House or to the joint session if consideration by a joint session of the States General is required.
As soon as the Lower House passes a Bill or resolves to present a Bill, it shall send it to the Upper House which shall consider the Bill as sent to it by the Lower House. The Lower House may instruct one or more of its members to defend a Bill presented by it in the Upper House.
The publication and entry into force of Acts of Parliament shall be regulated by Act of Parliament. They shall not enter into force before they have been published.
The Government shall promote the development of the international legal order.
Legislative, executive and judicial powers may be conferred on international institutions by or pursuant to a treaty, subject, where necessary, to the provisions of Article 91 paragraph 3.
Provisions of treaties and of resolutions by international institutions which may be binding on all persons by virtue of their contents shall become binding after they have been published.
Statutory regulations in force within the Kingdom shall not be applicable if such application is in conflict with provisions of treaties that are binding on all persons or of resolutions by international institutions.
Rules regarding the publication of treaties and decisions by international institutions shall be laid down by Act of Parliament.
Exemption from military service because of serious conscientious objections shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
Duties may be assigned for the purpose of civil defense in accordance with rules laid down by Act of Parliament.
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 401)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 22 June 2000, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 294)
Taxes imposed by the State shall be levied pursuant to Act of Parliament. Other levies imposed by the State shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
The monetary system shall be regulated by Act of Parliament.
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 25 February 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 133)
The legal status of public servants shall be regulated by Act of Parliament. Rules regarding employment protection and codetermination for public servants shall also be laid down by Act of Parliament.
In the exercise of their duties government bodies shall observe the right of public access to information in accordance with rules to be prescribed by Act of Parliament.
Honors shall be established by Act of Parliament.
Capital punishment may not be imposed.
Appeal to a higher administrative authority shall be admissible in the case of the disputes referred to in Article 112, paragraph 2.
Present and former members of the States General, Ministers and State Secretaries shall be tried by the Supreme Court for offences committed while in office. Proceedings shall be instituted by Royal Decree or by a resolution of the Lower House.
The constitutionality of Acts of Parliament and treaties shall not be reviewed by the courts.
Except in cases laid down by Act of Parliament, trials shall be held in public and judgments shall specify the grounds on which they are based. Judgments shall be pronounced in public.
The King's Commissioner may be charged by Act of Parliament with the execution of official instructions to be given by the Government.
Provincial and municipal ordinances shall be enacted by the provincial or municipal councils respectively, except in cases specified by Act of Parliament or by them pursuant to an Act of Parliament.
Except in cases laid down in Article 123, the powers referred to in Article 124, paragraph I may be assigned to bodies other than those specified in Article 125 only by the provincial or municipal councils respectively.
The right to elect members of a municipal council and the right to be a member of a municipal council may be granted by Act of Parliament to residents who are not Dutch nationals provided they fulfill at least the requirements applicable to residents who are Dutch nationals.
The King's Commissioners and the mayors shall be appointed by Royal Decree.
Rules pertaining to matters in which two or more public bodies are involved shall be laid down by Act of Parliament. These may provide for the establishment of a new public body, in which case Article 134, paragraphs 2 and 3, shall apply.
Disputes between public bodies shall be settled by Royal Decree unless they fall within the competence of the judiciary or decisions are referred to other bodies by Act of Parliament.
Amendments to the Constitution passed by the States General and ratified by the King shall enter into force immediately after they have been published.
Existing Acts of Parliament and other regulations and decrees which are in conflict with an amendment to the Constitution shall remain in force until provisions are made in accordance with the Constitution.
The text of the revised Constitution shall be published by Royal Decree in which the chapters, sections and articles may be renumbered and references to them altered accordingly.
The Constitution may be brought into line with the Charter for the Kingdom of the Netherlands by Act of Parliament. Articles 139, 140 and 141 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Articles 57a and 129, paragraph 3, second sentence, shall enter into force only after four years or on such earlier date as may be prescribed by or pursuant to Act of Parliament.
The amendment to article 54, paragraph 2 shall enter into force only after five years or on such earlier date as may be prescribed by or pursuant to Act of Parliament. This period may be extended for up to five years by Act of Parliament.
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
'Article 16 shall not apply to offences made punishable by the Wartime Offences Decree (Besluit Buitengewoon Strafrecht).
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 6 October 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 454)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 25 February 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 135)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
The wording of the proclamation of Acts of Parliament as laid down in Article 81 of the 1972 version of the Constitution, the wording of messages accompanying Bills sent from one House to the other or to the King and of the King's message to the States General containing his decision on the Bill, as laid down in Articles 123, 124, 127, 128 and 130 of the 1972 version of the Constitution, shall remain in force until such time as other arrangements are made.
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 402)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 6 October 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 454)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 25 February 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 135)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 10 July 1995, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 404)
(Lapsed in accordance with Kingdom Act of 6 October 1999, Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 454)
The following persons shall not be entitled to vote:
a. anyone who has committed an offence designated by Act of Parliament and has been sentenced as a result by a final and conclusive judgment of a court of law to a custodial sentence of not less than one year and simultaneously disqualified from voting;
b. anyone who has been deemed legally incompetent by a final and conclusive judgment of a court because of mental disorder.
The form of promulgating laws shall be as follows:
"We" etc. "King of the Netherlands," etc.
"Greetings to all those who shall see or hear these presents! be it known:
"Whereas we have considered that" etc.
(The reasons of the law.)
"Thus it is that We, having heard the Council of State, and in consultation with the States General, have approved and decreed, as we hereby approve and decree" etc.
(The contents of the law.)
"Given", etc.
In the event that a Queen reigns or royal authority is exercised by a regent or by the Council of State, the necessary modification shall be made in this form.
The King shall notify the States General as soon as possible whether he approves or disapproves a Bill which has been passed by it. Such notification shall take place by means of one of the following forms:
"The King assents to the Bill." or:
"The King is considering the Bill."
