An Act to consolidate certain enactments of the General Assembly relating to the Legislature of New Zealand
Division II—The House of Representatives. (Sections 12 to 241.)
Part 1—Constitution of House. (Sections 13 to 34.)
Part 2—Preliminary to the Election. (Sections 35 to 96.)
Part 3—Regulation of Elections. (Sections 97 to 179.)
Part 4—Maori Representation. (Sections 180 to 187.)
Part 5—Election Petitions and Corrupt and Illegal Practices. (Sections 188 to 232.)
Part 6—Miscellaneous. (Sections 233 to 241.)
Division III—Privileges of Parliament. (Sections 242 to 271.)
Division IV—Private, Local, and Private Estates Bills. (Sections 272 to 284.)
Parliament, when used alone, means the General Assembly.
The House of Representatives and any Committee of such House may respectively administer an oath to any witness examined before such House or Committee; and any person examined as aforesaid who wilfully gives false evidence is liable to the penalties of perjury.
process includes every writ, summons, and subpoena
Speaker includes the person for the time being acting in that capacity.
[Repealed]
On any such application for an exemption from attendance being made to any such Court as aforesaid, or to any Judge thereof, unless it appears to the satisfaction of the Court or Judge that the ends of public justice would be defeated or injuriously delayed or irreparable injury would be caused to any party to the proceedings by the non-attendance of such member or officer in obedience to such process or in pursuance of such process, the Court or Judge shall order that such member or officer shall be discharged from attendance in obedience to such process until the expiration of 10 days after the termination of the session of the General Assembly in respect of which such exemption is claimed, and may make order for the attendance of such member or officer at the sitting of such Court at such future date after the expiration of such 10 days as such Court or Judge thinks fit.
Where the Speaker of the House of Representatives, being in attendance on Parliament, is required by the process of any Court to attend thereat personally either as a party or a witness in any civil proceeding, or as a witness in any criminal proceeding, he shall submit the matter to the House of Representatives and such order may be made thereon as the House thinks fit; and if it is resolved that the Speaker shall be exempted from attendance, such resolution shall be presented in like manner and shall have the same effect as the certificate mentioned in section 263 in respect of any other member not being a Speaker:
provided that if the House is under adjournment, and it is necessary to act without delay, the Speaker whose attendance is required may sign a certificate to the like effect as is hereinafter provided in the said section in respect of any other member not being a Speaker, but such certificate shall remain in force only until the matter is submitted by the Speaker at the first convenient opportunity to the House, and order is made thereon.
Where any member of Parliament (other than the Speaker thereof) or any such officer as aforesaid, being in attendance on Parliament, is required by the process of any Court to attend thereat personally as a party or witness in any civil proceeding, or as a witness in any criminal proceeding, such member or officer may apply to the Speaker or Acting Speaker of the House to be exempted from such attendance on such Court.
[Repealed]
On any such application to a Speaker or Acting Speaker as aforesaid, unless it appears to his satisfaction, on such inquiry as he thinks fit to make into the circumstances of the case, that the ends of public justice would be defeated or injuriously delayed, or that irreparable injury would be caused to any party to the proceedings by the non-attendance of such member or officer in obedience to such process, such Speaker or Acting Speaker shall grant a certificate under his hand to the effect that the attendance in the General Assembly of the member or officer therein named is required during the session.
On such certificate being presented to the Court in which the attendance of such member or officer is required he shall be thereby exempted from attending therein until 10 days after the termination of the session then being held; and no proceedings, civil or criminal, shall be taken against such member or officer in respect of his non-attendance in obedience to such process, and the Court shall direct such postponement of trial or other proceedings, and make such order as it deems convenient and just, regard being had to such exemption as aforesaid.
Where any civil proceedings are pending in any Court of record against any such member or officer as aforesaid, and such proceedings are set down for trial or hearing, or are likely in the ordinary course to come on for trial or hearing, at a sitting of any such Court to be held within the period extending from 10 days before the holding of any session of the General Assembly, to 30 days after the termination of the said session, such member or officer may obtain an adjournment or appointment of such trial or hearing to some day later than the period of 30 days last mentioned, upon the conditions following:
The Court in which such civil proceedings are pending shall, in either of the cases referred to in the last preceding section, cause the trial or hearing of such proceedings to be adjourned without cost to such member or officer, from time to time, to some sitting of the Court to be held after the expiration of 30 days after the termination of the session: provided that in the case referred to in paragraph (a) of the said last preceding section, the Court may make the same inquiries as the Speaker of the House of Representatives is required to make under the said section 263, and shall not be bound to adjourn or postpone the trial or hearing if it is satisfied that irreparable injury would be caused to any party to such proceedings by such adjournment or postponement.
If any person serves or causes to be served any summons or process issued out of any Court not of record (other than a summons or warrant on a charge of any offence), upon or for any such member or officer as aforesaid by sending, leaving, or delivering the same in any way which would otherwise be good service by law, during any session of the General Assembly, or within 10 days before the commencement or 10 days after the termination of such session, such service shall be invalid and of no effect.
It shall be the duty of all Courts, Judges, and Justices, and all other persons, to take judicial notice of the signatures of the Speaker or Acting Speaker of the House of Representatives when affixed to any such certificate as aforesaid.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or abridge in any respect the power of the House of Representatives to give leave to any of the members or officers of the House of Representatives to attend any Court in respect of which it appears desirable to the House of Representatives that such leave should be granted:
provided that any member of the House of Representatives having obtained leave of absence without any reference to the process of any Court shall, so far as regards any Court not being a Court of record, but not as regards a Court of record, be considered as in attendance upon his duties in Parliament.
Alcoholic Liquors Sale Control Act Amendment Act 1895 (1895 No 45) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Disqualification Act 1878 (1878 No 30)
Electoral Act 1893 (1893 No 18)
Electoral Act 1905 (1905 No 29)
Legislative Council Act 1891 (1891 No 25)
Legislative Council Act Amendment Act 1902 (1902 No 50)
Legislative Officers’ Salaries Act 1867 (1867 No 85)
Legislative Officers’ Salaries Act Amendment Act 1906 (1906 No 54)
Licensing Acts Amendment Act 1904 (1904 No 42) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Parliamentary and Executive Titles Act 1907 (1907 No 50) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1865 (1865 No 13)
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1865 Amendment Act 1875 (1875 No 20)
Parliamentary Witnesses Indemnity Act 1883 (1883 No 3)
Payment of Members Act 1904 (1904 No 24)
Private and Local Bills Costs Act 1882 (1882 No 24)
Private Estates Bills Act 1867 (1867 No 17)
Privileges Act 1866 (1866 No 73)
Privileges Act 1866 Amendment Act 1872 (1872 No 73)
Privileges Act 1866 Amendment Act 1878 (1878 No 16)
Public Service Classification Act 1907 (1907 No 55) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Statute Law Amendment Act 1906 (1906 No 58) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
The Clerk of the House of Representatives.
The Deputy Clerk of the House of Representatives.
The Sergeant-at-Arms.
The Clerk Assistant of the House of Representatives.
[Repealed]
Public Act: 1992 No 106
Date of assent: 26 November 1992
Commencement: 1 February 1993
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Parliamentary paper means any report, paper, votes, or proceedings.
This Act binds the Crown.
An Act to consolidate certain enactments of the Parliament of New Zealand relating to the High Court and the Court of Appeal, and to certain rules and provisions of law in judicial matters generally
Part 1A: Special provisions applying to certain proceedings in the High Court and the Federal Court of Australia. (Sections 56D to 56S.)
Part 2: The Court of Appeal. (Sections 57 to 75.)
Part 3: Rules and provisions of law in judicial matters generally. (Sections 76 to 101.)
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Chief High Court Judge—
civil proceedings means any proceedings in the court, other than criminal proceedings
court means the High Court of New Zealand
Court of Appeal Rules means rules which are made under section 51C and which regulate the practice and procedure of the Court of Appeal (including the practice and procedure on civil appeals from any court or person to the Court of Appeal); and includes the Court of Appeal (Civil) Rules 2005
defendant means a person served or intended to be served with any application to the court for the exercise of its civil or criminal jurisdiction
existing means existing on the coming into operation of this Act
High Court Rules means the rules from time to time set out in Schedule 2
inferior court means any court of judicature within New Zealand of inferior jurisdiction to the High Court
interlocutory application—
Judge means a Judge of the High Court
judgment includes decree
medical practitioner means a health practitioner who is, or is deemed to be, registered with the Medical Council of New Zealand continued by section 114(1)(a) of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003 as a practitioner of the profession of medicine
plaintiff means a person who makes an application (other than an interlocutory application) to the court for the exercise of its civil or criminal jurisdiction
Supreme Court means the Supreme Court of New Zealand established by section 6 of the Supreme Court Act 2003.
[Repealed]
No person shall be appointed a Judge unless he has held a practising certificate as a barrister or solicitor for at least 7 years.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
(a − b) × c/d
where—
b is the applicable yearly rate of salary determined by the Remuneration Authority to be payable to a Judge who is not a permanent Judge
c is 0.0383561 (the standard payroll factor, which represents the proportion of an annual salary that is paid per fortnight)
d is 10 (the number of working days per fortnight).
[Repealed]
No appointment may be made under section 11 or section 11A except on a certificate signed by the Chief Justice and the Chief High Court Judge to the effect that, in their opinion, it is necessary for the due conduct of the court’s business that 1 or more temporary Judges, or (as the case may require) for 1 or more acting Judges, to be appointed.
[Repealed]
Every Judge, other than a former Judge appointed under section 11 or section 11A or a person who is deemed by section 58(10) to be a Judge, shall retire from office on attaining the age of 70 years.
If the Chief Justice or the President of the Court of Appeal resigns from office before attaining the age of 70 years and is, at the time of his or her resignation and but for the fact of his or her resignation, entitled to a period of leave of absence, he or she shall continue to receive the salary, privileges, and allowances of his or her former office until the expiration of that period or until he or she attains the age of 70 years or until he or she dies, whichever is the sooner, and his or her rights and obligations under the Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956 and all the rights which his or her surviving wife, husband, civil union partner, or de facto partner may have under that Act shall be the same as they would have been if he or she had been in office while his or her salary, privileges, and allowances so continued.
[Repealed]
The court shall continue to have all the jurisdiction which it had on the coming into operation of this Act and all judicial jurisdiction which may be necessary to administer the laws of New Zealand.
Where the court has jurisdiction to entertain an application for an injunction or specific performance, it may award damages in addition to, or in substitution for, an injunction or specific performance.
The court shall also have within New Zealand all the jurisdiction and control over the persons and estates of mentally disordered persons, and persons of unsound mind, and over the managers of such persons and estates respectively, as the Lord Chancellor of England, or any Judge or Judges of Her Majesty’s High Court of Justice or of Her Majesty’s Court of Appeal, so far as the same may be applicable to the circumstances of New Zealand, has or have in England under the Sign-manual of Her Majesty or otherwise.
Part 16 of the Companies Act 1993 (except sections 241(1) to (4) and 268) shall apply, with such modifications as may be necessary, in relation to the liquidation of an association and as if references to—
For the purposes of section 17A, an association is unable to pay its debts—
The liquidator may, by notice in writing, require any person who is liable to pay or contribute to the payment of—
to pay or contribute accordingly and every such person is liable to pay or contribute the amount due in respect of that liability.
Where the court appoints a liquidator of an association, no action or proceeding shall be commenced or continued against any person referred to in section 17D in respect of any debt of the association, except with the leave of the court, and subject to such terms as the court may impose.
The court shall not have jurisdiction to try any felony or misdemeanour committed before 14 January 1840.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
The Governor-General in Council may from time to time appoint special sittings of the court for the despatch of civil and criminal business, to be held at such time and place or places, and before such Judge or Judges, as he thinks fit.
[Repealed]
any party to the dispute may apply to a Judge nominated under subsection (1) or subsection (2) for the determination of the questions involved in the dispute.
The court may from time to time give such directions as the court thinks fit (whether or not inconsistent with the High Court Rules or any rules made under section 51C) for the speedy and inexpensive determination of the real questions between the parties to proceedings entered on a commercial list.
The parties to any proceedings entered on a commercial list may agree that the decision of the court shall be final.
Notwithstanding anything in section 19A, no proceeding entered on a commercial list shall be tried before a jury.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
For the purpose of providing a superannuation fund or retiring allowance for persons appointed as Associate Judges, sums by way of subsidy or contribution may from time to time be paid under Part 5B of the Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956 or to any registered superannuation scheme in accordance with a determination of the Remuneration Authority.
Sections 56A, 56B, and 56C shall apply in respect of any proceedings before an Associate Judge, and an Associate Judge shall have and may exercise all the jurisdiction and powers which, pursuant to those sections, are vested in the court or a Judge.
Except as provided by section 26K, an Associate Judge shall have no jurisdiction or power to make an order for the committal, attachment, or arrest of any person.
An Associate Judge may act as a referee under the High Court Rules in respect of any proceedings or any question arising in the course of any proceedings.
An Associate Judge shall have power to order the adjournment of any proceedings, notwithstanding that an Associate Judge would not otherwise have jurisdiction in respect of those proceedings.
Every Associate Judge has the same immunities as a Judge of the High Court.
Nothing in this Act or in any rules made under section 51C or in any rules made under any other Act in the manner provided in that section shall prevent the exercise by any Judge of any jurisdiction or power conferred on an Associate Judge by this Act or by any such rules.
There may from time to time be appointed under the State Sector Act 1988 such Registrars, Deputy Registrars, and other officers as may be required for the conduct of the business of the court.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Every Sheriff shall have such powers and privileges, duties and responsibilities, as a Sheriff by law has or is liable to in England as a ministerial officer of one of Her Majesty’s Courts at Westminster.
In addition to his powers and privileges, duties and responsibilities, as a ministerial officer, each Sheriff shall also have and exercise the powers and duties of the Queen’s bailiff.
No Sheriff shall be in any way concerned in any action in any court in New Zealand either as a barrister, solicitor, or agent.
Where any process issues which the Sheriff ought not by law to execute, the High Court shall authorise some fit person to execute the same; and in every such case the cause of such special proceeding shall be entered upon the records of the court.
Where any Sheriff, Sheriff’s officer, bailiff, or other person employed under the Sheriff, has arrested any person under or by virtue of any writ or process whatsoever, he may forthwith thereafter convey such person, or cause him to be conveyed, to such prison as he ought to be sent to by virtue of the writ or process against him.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
All fees taken by a Sheriff under this Act must be paid immediately into a Crown Bank Account.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Every oath, affidavit, or affirmation taken or made before any such Commissioner as aforesaid shall within New Zealand be of the like effect in all respects as if the same had been administered, made, or taken by or before any court or persons having authority to administer or take the same in New Zealand.
Where any other Act confers power to make rules of procedure in relation to civil proceedings, that power shall be exercised by the Governor-General in Council in the manner prescribed by section 51C, and not otherwise.
All fees received under this Act must be paid into a Crown Bank Account.
[Repealed]
Nothing in this Act affects the powers of a court or Judge to discharge a juror or jury for a civil case under section 22 of the Juries Act 1981.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
any constable or officer of the court, with or without the assistance of any other person, may, by order of the Judge, take the offender into custody and detain him until the rising of the court.
[Repealed]
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
whether or not any other matter arises for determination; and includes an interlocutory proceeding related to such a proceeding and an application for the issue of execution or enforcement of a judgment or order or injunction given or made or granted in such a proceeding
Federal Court means the Federal Court of Australia
New Zealand proceeding means a proceeding in which a matter for determination arises under—
whether or not any other matter arises for determination; and includes an interlocutory proceeding related to such a proceeding and an application for the issue of execution or enforcement of a judgment or order or injunction given or made or granted in such a proceeding.
This Part is not limited or affected by the Trans-Tasman Proceedings Act 2010.
Nothing in the Courts (Remote Participation) Act 2010 applies to any appearance by video link or telephone conference in accordance with this Part.
A person who is entitled to practise as a barrister, or solicitor, or both, in the Federal Court is entitled to practise as a barrister, or solicitor, or both in relation to—
Notwithstanding any rule of law, the High Court may, in a New Zealand proceeding, make an order or grant an injunction that the court is empowered to make or grant that requires a person to do an act, or refrain from engaging in conduct, in Australia.
shall be conclusive evidence of the matters stated in it.
No application for review under Part 1 of the Judicature Amendment Act 1972 and no application for an order of mandamus or prohibition or certiorari or for a declaration or injunction may be brought in respect of any judgment or order or determination of the Federal Court made or given at a sitting of that court in New Zealand in an Australian proceeding.
has all the privileges and immunities of a party in a proceeding in the High Court.
provided and it is hereby declared that the Court of Appeal heretofore and now held and henceforth to be held is and shall be deemed and taken to be the same court.
it is necessary for a specified Judge who has been assigned to a division of the court under section 58C to sit as a member of the full court, that Judge may sit as a member of the full court.
[Repealed]
Where, by reason of the absence of all or any 1 or more of the Judges of the Court of Appeal at the time appointed for the sitting of the court or any adjournment thereof, it is necessary to adjourn the sitting of the court to a future day, any 1 or more of the Judges at the time appointed for such sitting, or at the time of any adjournment thereof, or the Registrar of the said court in case none of the Judges thereof are present, may adjourn or further adjourn such sitting to such future day and hour as such Judge or Judges or such Registrar think fit.
The Court of Appeal shall have power to remit any proceedings in any cause pending before it to the High Court or a single Judge thereof.
All judgments, decrees, and orders of the Court of Appeal may be enforced by the High Court as if they had been given or made by that court.
[Repealed]
The Court of Appeal shall have jurisdiction and power to hear and determine appeals from any judgment, decree, or order save as hereinafter mentioned, of the High Court, subject to the provisions of this Act and to such rules and orders for regulating the terms and conditions on which such appeals shall be allowed as may be made pursuant to this Act.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
There may from time to time be appointed under the State Sector Act 1988 such Registrars, Deputy Registrars, and other officers as may be required for the conduct of the business of the Court of Appeal.
All such Registrars and other officers shall have in respect of the Court of Appeal such powers and duties as are prescribed by rules made under this Act.
The Court of Appeal shall have in the custody of the Registrar a seal for the sealing of writs, orders, decrees, office copies, certificates, reports, and other instruments issued by such Registrar and requiring to be sealed.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Every person who, being surety for the debt or duty of another, or being liable with another for any debt or duty, pays or satisfies such debt or performs such duty shall be entitled to have assigned to him, or a trustee for him, every judgment, specialty, or other security held by the creditor in respect of such debt or duty, whether such judgment, specialty, or other security is or is not deemed at law to be satisfied by the payment of the debt or performance of the duty.
A co-surety, co-contractor, or co-debtor shall not be entitled to recover from any other co-surety, co-contractor, or co-debtor by the means aforesaid more than the just proportion to which, as between those parties themselves, such last-mentioned person is justly liable.
provided that nothing in this subsection shall—
In case of any action founded on any negotiable instrument, the court may order that the loss of such instrument shall not be taken advantage of, provided an indemnity is given to the satisfaction of the court or a Registrar thereof against the claims of any other person upon such negotiable instrument.
[Repealed]
Stipulations in contracts as to time or otherwise which would not, before 13 September 1882 (the date of the coming into force of the Law Amendment Act 1882), have been deemed to be or to have become the essence of such contracts in a court of equity shall receive in all courts the same construction and effect as they would have theretofore received in equity.
[Repealed]
An acknowledgement in writing by a creditor, or by any person authorised by him in writing in that behalf, of the receipt of a part of his debt in satisfaction of the whole debt shall operate as a discharge of the debt, any rule of law notwithstanding.
[Repealed]
A judgment against 1 or more of several persons jointly liable shall not operate as a bar or defence to civil proceedings against any of such persons against whom judgment has not been recovered, except to the extent to which the judgment has been satisfied, any rule of law notwithstanding.
Relief, whether under section 94A or in equity or otherwise, in respect of any payment made under mistake, whether of law or of fact, shall be denied wholly or in part if the person from whom relief is sought received the payment in good faith and has so altered his position in reliance on the validity of the payment that in the opinion of the court, having regard to all possible implications in respect of other persons, it is inequitable to grant relief, or to grant relief in full, as the case may be.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
then, after the commencement of that Act,—
Generally in all matters in which there is any conflict or variance between the rules of equity and the rules of the common law with reference to the same matter the rules of equity shall prevail.
[Repealed]
[Schedule 1 omitted due length - full text is available online at: http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1908/0089/latest/DLM147652.html?search=ts_act%40bill%40regulation%40deemedreg_judicature+act_resel_25_a&p=1]
[Schedule 2 omitted due length - full text is available online at: http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1908/0089/latest/DLM147653.html?search=ts_act%40bill%40regulation%40deemedreg_judicature+act_resel_25_a&p=1]
[Repealed]
Public Act: 1920 No 27
Date of assent: 21 November 1910
Commencement: 21 November 1910
This Act may be cited as the Judicature Amendment Act 1910, and shall form part of and be read together with the Judicature Act 1908.
In any case coming within the exceptions specified in paragraphs (c) and (d) of section 3 of the Imprisonment for Debt Limitation Act 1908, or within either of those exceptions, any court or Judge making the order for payment, or having jurisdiction in the action or proceeding in which the order for payment is made, may inquire into the case, and (subject to the provisoes contained in the said section 3) may grant or refuse, either absolutely or upon terms, any application for a writ of attachment, or other process or order of arrest or imprisonment, and any application to stay the operation of any such writ, process, or order, or for discharge from arrest or imprisonment thereunder.
Public Act: 1952 No 24
Date of assent: 16 October 1952
Commencement 16: October 1952
This Act may be cited as the Judicature Amendment Act 1952, and shall be read together with and deemed part of the Judicature Act 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”).
Public Act: 1972 No 130
Date of assent: 20 October 1972
Commencement 20: October 1972
This Act may be cited as the Judicature Amendment Act 1972, and shall be read together with and deemed part of the Judicature Act 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”).
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
decision includes a determination or order
licence includes any permit, warrant, authorisation, registration, certificate, approval, or similar form of authority required by law
person includes a corporation sole, and also a body of persons whether incorporated or not; and, in relation to the exercise, refusal to exercise, or proposed or purported exercise by any person of a statutory power of decision, includes a District Court, the Compensation Court, the Maori Land Court, and the Maori Appellate Court
statutory power means a power or right conferred by or under any Act or by or under the constitution or other instrument of incorporation, rules, or bylaws of any body corporate—
statutory power of decision means a power or right conferred by or under any Act, or by or under the constitution or other instrument of incorporation, rules, or bylaws of any body corporate, to make a decision deciding or prescribing or affecting—
This Part is subject to the provisions of the Employment Relations Act 2000 relating to the jurisdiction of the Employment Court and High Court in respect of applications for review or proceedings for a writ or order of, or in the nature of, mandamus, prohibition, certiorari, or for a declaration or injunction against any body constituted by, or any person acting pursuant to, the Employment Relations Act 2000.
On an application for review in relation to a statutory power of decision, where the sole ground of relief established is a defect in form or a technical irregularity, if the court finds that no substantial wrong or miscarriage of justice has occurred, it may refuse relief and, where the decision has already been made, may make an order validating the decision, notwithstanding the defect or irregularity, to have effect from such time and on such terms as the court thinks fit.
Where proceedings are commenced for a writ or order of or in the nature of mandamus, prohibition, or certiorari, in relation to the exercise, refusal to exercise, or proposed or purported exercise of a statutory power, the proceedings shall be treated and disposed of as if they were an application for review.
Where proceedings are commenced for a declaration or injunction, or both, whether with or without a claim for other relief, and the exercise, refusal to exercise, or proposed or purported exercise of a statutory power is an issue in the proceedings, the court on the application of any party to the proceedings may, if it considers it appropriate, direct that the proceedings be treated and disposed of, so far as they relate to that issue, as if they were an application for review.
Any party to an application for review who is dissatisfied with any final or interlocutory order in respect of the application may appeal to the Court of Appeal; and section 66 of the principal Act shall apply to any such appeal.
Subject to section 14, this Part shall bind the Crown.
Subject to sections 14 and 15, every reference to any enactment (other than this Act), or in any regulation, to any of the proceedings referred to in subsection (1) of section 4 shall hereafter, unless the context otherwise requires, be read as including a reference to an application for review.
Public Act: 1997 No 10
Date of assent: 22 May 1997
Commencement: see section 1(2)
An Act to provide for the observance, and confirmation, of the principles of the Treaty of Waitangi by establishing a Tribunal to make recommendations on claims relating to the practical application of the Treaty and to determine whether certain matters are inconsistent with the principles of the Treaty
Whereas on 6 February 1840 a Treaty was entered into at Waitangi between Her late Majesty Queen Victoria and the Maori people of New Zealand:
And whereas the text of the Treaty in the English language differs from the text of the Treaty in the Maori language:
And whereas it is desirable that a Tribunal be established to make recommendations on claims relating to the practical application of the principles of the Treaty and, for that purpose, to determine its meaning and effect and whether certain matters are inconsistent with those principles.
This Act may be cited as the Treaty of Waitangi Act 1975.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Maori means a person of the Maori race of New Zealand; and includes any descendant of such a person
private land means any land, or interest in land, held by a person other than—
submit, in relation to a historical Treaty claim, means submitted in accordance with a practice note made by the Tribunal under clause 5(10) of Schedule 2
Treaty means the Treaty of Waitangi as set out in English and in Maori in Schedule 1
Tribunal means the Waitangi Tribunal established under this Act.
This Act shall bind the Crown.
The appointment of a Judge as Chairperson, the deputy of the Chairperson, or as a member of the Tribunal, or service by that Judge as Chairperson, the deputy of the Chairperson, or a member of the Tribunal, does not affect the Judge’s tenure of the judicial office or the Judge’s rank, title, status, precedence, salary, annual or other allowances or other rights or privileges as a Judge (including those in relation to superannuation) and, for all purposes, the Judge’s service as a member is service as a Judge.
and that the ordinance or Act, or the regulations, order, proclamation, notice, or other statutory instrument, or the policy or practice, or the act or omission, was or is inconsistent with the principles of the Treaty, he or she may submit that claim to the Tribunal under this section.
arises in proceedings before the Tribunal, the Tribunal may refer that question to the Maori Appellate Court for decision.
include in its recommendation under section 6(3), a recommendation that that land or that part of that land or that interest in land be returned to Maori ownership (which recommendation shall be on such terms and conditions as the Tribunal considers appropriate and shall identify the Maori or group of Maori to whom that land or that part of that land or that interest in land is to be returned); or
recommend to the Minister within the meaning of section 4 of the Cadastral Survey Act 2002 that that land or that part of that land or that interest in land be no longer subject to resumption under section 27B of the State-Owned Enterprises Act 1986 or section 212 of the Education Act 1989; or
as the case may be, no recommendation under this section shall relate to that interest in land.
in relation to any application under this section.
issue a certificate to the effect that the land or interest in land is no longer subject to resumption under section 27B of the State-Owned Enterprises Act 1986 or section 212 of the Education Act 1989.
the Minister within the meaning of section 4 of the Cadastral Survey Act 2002 shall cause a copy of the certificate to be lodged in the office of the Surveyor-General, and the Surveyor-General shall note the certificate upon the proper plans and records of the district affected.
giving the reasons for the directions considered appropriate.
The Tribunal shall cause a sealed copy of its decision and recommendation (if any) with regard to any application under section 8D to be served on—
For the purposes of sections 8HB to 8HI, the expressions Crown forestry assets, Crown forest land, Crown forestry licence, and licensed land shall have the same meanings as they have in section 2 of the Crown Forest Assets Act 1989.
include in its recommendation under section 6(3) a recommendation that the land or that part of that land be returned to Maori ownership (which recommendation shall be on such terms and conditions as the Tribunal considers appropriate and shall identify the Maori or group of Maori to whom that land or that part of that land is to be returned); or
recommend to the Minister within the meaning of section 4 of the Cadastral Survey Act 2002 that that land or that part of that land not be liable to return to Maori ownership; or
in relation to any application under this section.
the Minister within the meaning of section 4 of the Cadastral Survey Act 2002 shall cause a copy of the certificate to be lodged in the office of the Surveyor-General for the district in which the land is situated, and the Surveyor-General shall note the certificate on the plans and records relating to the land.
The Tribunal shall cause a sealed copy of its decision and recommendations (if any) with regard to any application under section 8HE to be served on—
In respect of every claim submitted to the Tribunal under section 6 that relates in whole or in part to land or an interest in land that, immediately before being vested in a Crown transferee company pursuant to section 6 of the New Zealand Railways Corporation Restructuring Act 1990, was land owned by the Crown or an interest owned by the Crown in land, whether or not the land or interest in land is still vested in that company, the provisions of sections 8A to 8H shall apply with such modifications as may be necessary and, in particular, as if—
The Minister of Maori Affairs shall in each year prepare and lay before the House of Representatives a report on the progress being made in the implementation of recommendations made to the Crown by the Tribunal.
Nothing in this Act shall affect in any way the right of any person to petition the House of Representatives for the redress of any grievance, or the jurisdiction of any committee or other body set up by the House of Representatives to deal with a petition to the House of Representatives.
HER MAJESTY VICTORIA Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland regarding with Her Royal Favour the Native Chiefs and Tribes of New Zealand and anxious to protect their just Rights and Property and to secure to them the enjoyment of Peace and Good Order has deemed it necessary in consequence of the great number of Her Majesty’s Subjects who have already settled in New Zealand and the rapid extension of Emigration both from Europe and Australia which is still in progress to constitute and appoint a functionary properly authorized to treat with the Aborigines of New Zealand for the recognition of Her Majesty’s Sovereign authority over the whole or any part of those islands — Her Majesty therefore being desirous to establish a settled form of Civil Government with a view to avert the evil consequences which must result from the absence of the necessary Laws and Institutions alike to the native population and to Her subjects has been graciously pleased to empower and to authorize me William Hobson a Captain in Her Majesty’s Royal Navy Consul and Lieutenant Governor of such parts of New Zealand as may be or hereafter shall be ceded to her Majesty to invite the confederated and independent Chiefs of New Zealand to concur in the following Articles and Conditions.
The Chiefs of the Confederation of the United Tribes of New Zealand and the separate and independent Chiefs who have not become members of the Confederation cede to Her Majesty the Queen of England absolutely and without reservation all the rights and powers of Sovereignty which the said Confederation or Individual Chiefs respectively exercise or possess, or may be supposed to exercise or to possess over their respective Territories as the sole Sovereigns thereof.
Her Majesty the Queen of England confirms and guarantees to the Chiefs and Tribes of New Zealand and to the respective families and individuals thereof the full exclusive and undisturbed possession of their Lands and Estates Forests Fisheries and other properties which they may collectively or individually possess so long as it is their wish and desire to retain the same in their possession; but the Chiefs of the United Tribes and the individual Chiefs yield to Her Majesty the exclusive right of Preemption over such lands as the proprietors thereof may be disposed to alienate at such prices as may be agreed upon between the respective Proprietors and persons appointed by Her Majesty to treat with them in that behalf.
In consideration thereof Her Majesty the Queen of England extends to the Natives of New Zealand Her royal protection and imparts to them all the Rights and Privileges of British Subjects.
W HOBSON, Lieutenant Governor.
Now therefore We the Chiefs of the Confederation of the United Tribes of New Zealand being assembled in Congress at Victoria in Waitangi and We the Separate and Independent Chiefs of New Zealand claiming authority over the Tribes and Territories which are specified after our respective names, having been made fully to understand the Provisions of the foregoing Treaty, accept and enter into the same in the full spirit and meaning thereof: in witness of which we have attached our signatures or marks at the places and the dates respectively specified.
Done at Waitangi this Sixth day of February in the year of Our Lord One thousand eight hundred and forty.
[Here follow signatures, dates, etc.]
[Text in Maori omitted due to length - full text can be found online at http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1975/0114/latest/DLM435843.html]
Elizabeth the Second, by the Grace of God Queen of New Zealand and Her Other Realms and Territories, Head of the Commonwealth, Defender of the Faith:
To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting:
And We do declare Our will and pleasure as follows:
We do hereby constitute, order, and declare that there shall be, in and over Our Realm of New Zealand, which comprises—
a Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief who shall be Our representative in Our Realm of New Zealand, and shall have and may exercise the powers and authorities conferred on him by these Our Letters Patent, but without prejudice to the office, powers, or authorities of any other person who has been or may be appointed to represent Us in any part of Our Realm of New Zealand and to exercise powers and authorities on Our behalf.
And We do hereby order and declare that Our Governor-General and Commander-in-Chief (hereinafter called Our Governor-General) shall be appointed by Us, by Commission under the Seal of New Zealand, and shall hold office during Our pleasure.
And We do hereby authorise and empower Our Governor-General, except as may be otherwise provided by law,—
Our Governor-General shall do and execute all the powers and authorities of the Governor-General according to—
Every person appointed to fill the Office of Governor-General shall, before entering on any of the duties of the office, cause the Commission appointing him to be Governor-General to be publicly read, in the presence of the Chief Justice, or some other Judge of the High Court of New Zealand, and of members of the Executive Council thereof.
Our Governor-General shall, immediately after the public reading of the Commission appointing him, take—
I, [name], swear that, as Governor-General and Commander- in-Chief of the Realm of New Zealand, comprising New Zealand; the self-governing states of the Cook Islands and Niue; Tokelau; and the Ross Dependency, I will faithfully and impartially serve Her [or His] Majesty [specify the name of the reigning Sovereign, as thus: Queen Elizabeth the Second], Queen of New Zealand [or King of New Zealand], Her [or His] heirs and successors, and the people of the Realm of New Zealand, in accordance with their respective laws and customs. So help me God.
which Oaths the Chief Justice or other Judge in whose presence the Commission is read is hereby required to administer.
And We do by these presents constitute an Executive Council to advise Us and Our Governor-General in the Government of Our Realm of New Zealand.
The Executive Council shall consist of those persons who, having been appointed to the Executive Council from among persons eligible for appointment under the Constitution Act 1986, are for the time being Our responsible advisers.
The Executive Council shall not proceed to the despatch of business unless two members at the least (exclusive of any member presiding in the absence of Our Governor-General) be present throughout the whole of the meeting at which any such business is despatched, except that in a situation of urgency or emergency, members may be present by any method of communication that allows each member to participate effectively during the whole of the meeting.
And We do hereby authorise and empower Our Governor- General, from time to time in Our name and on Our behalf, to constitute and appoint under the Seal of New Zealand, to hold office during pleasure, all such members of the Executive Council, Ministers of the Crown, commissioners, diplomatic or consular representatives of New Zealand, principal representatives of New Zealand in any other country or accredited to any international organisation, and other necessary officers as may be lawfully constituted or appointed by Us.
And We do further authorise and empower Our Governor-General, in Our name and on Our behalf, to exercise the prerogative of mercy in Our Realm of New Zealand, except in any part thereof where, under any law now or hereafter in force, the prerogative of mercy may be exercised in Our name and on Our behalf by any other person or persons, to the exclusion of Our Governor-General; and for greater certainty but not so as to restrict the authority hereby conferred, Our Governor-General may:
Whenever the Office of Governor-General is vacant, or the holder of the Office is for any reason unable to perform all or any of the functions of the Office, We do hereby authorise, empower, and command the Chief Justice of New Zealand to perform the functions of the Office of Governor-General. If, however, there is for the time being no Chief Justice able to act as Governor-General, then the next most senior Judge of the New Zealand judiciary who is able so to act is so authorised, empowered, and commanded. The Chief Justice or the next most senior Judge, while performing all or any of the functions of the Office of Governor-General, is to be known as the Administrator of the Government; and in these Our Letters Patent every reference to Our Governor-General includes, unless inconsistent with the context, a reference to Our Administrator of the Government.
The said Chief Justice or next most senior Judge of the New Zealand judiciary shall, on the first occasion on which he is required to act as Administrator of the Government and before entering on any of the duties of the Office of Governor-General, take the Oaths hereinbefore directed to be taken by Our Governor-General, which Oaths, with such modifications as are necessary, shall be administered by some other Judge of the High Court of New Zealand, in the presence of not less than two members of the Executive Council.
While Our Administrator of the Government is performing all or any of the functions of the Office of Governor-General, the powers and authorities of Our Governor-General shall not be abridged, altered, or in any way affected, otherwise than as We may at any time hereafter think proper to direct.
[Revoked]
Our Ministers of the Crown in New Zealand shall keep Our Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the Government of Our said Realm, so far as they are responsible therefor, and shall furnish Our Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter relating to the Government of Our said Realm.
Our Ministers of the Crown and other officers, civil and military, and all other inhabitants of Our Realm of New Zealand, shall obey, aid, and assist Our Governor-General in the performance of the functions of the Office of Governor-General.
And We do hereby reserve to Ourselves, Our heirs and successors, full power and authority from time to time to revoke, alter, or amend these Our Letters Patent as to Us or them shall seem meet.
And We do further declare that these Our Letters Patent shall take effect as part of the law of Our Realm of New Zealand, comprising New Zealand, the self- governing state of the Cook Islands, the self-governing state of Niue, Tokelau, and the Ross Dependency on the 1st day of November 1983.
In witness whereof We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patent, and for the greater testimony and validity thereof We have caused the Seal of New Zealand to be affixed to these presents, which We have signed with Our Regal Hand.
Given the 28th day of October in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Nine Hundred and Eighty-three and in the 32nd Year of Our Reign.
An Act to reform the constitutional law of New Zealand, to bring together into one enactment certain provisions of constitutional significance, and to provide that the New Zealand Constitution Act 1852 of the Parliament of the United Kingdom shall cease to have effect as part of the law of New Zealand
Any function, duty, or power exercisable by or conferred on any Minister of the Crown (by whatever designation that Minister is known) may, unless the context otherwise requires, be exercised or performed by any member of the Executive Council.
The Solicitor-General may perform a function or duty imposed, or exercise a power conferred, on the Attorney-General.
The House of Representatives shall, at its first meeting after any general election of its members, and immediately on its first meeting after any vacancy occurs in the office of Speaker, choose one of its members as its Speaker, and every such choice shall be effective on being confirmed by the Governor-General.
A person who is in office as Speaker immediately before the dissolution or expiration of Parliament shall, notwithstanding that dissolution or expiration, continue in office until the close of polling day at the next general election unless that person sooner vacates office as Speaker.
A Bill passed by the House of Representatives shall become law when the Sovereign or the Governor-General assents to it and signs it in token of such assent.
— whichever occurs first.
After any general election of members of the House of Representatives, Parliament shall meet not later than 6 weeks after the day fixed for the return of the writs for that election.
[Repealed]
It shall not be lawful for the Crown, except by or under an Act of Parliament,—
A Judge of the High Court shall not be removed from office except by the Sovereign or the Governor-General, acting upon an address of the House of Representatives, which address may be moved only on the grounds of that Judge’s misbehaviour or of that Judge’s incapacity to discharge the functions of that Judge’s office.
The salary of a Judge of the High Court shall not be reduced during the continuance of the Judge’s commission.
— shall cease to have effect as part of the law of New Zealand.
The enactments specified in Schedule 1 are hereby amended in the manner indicated in that schedule.
Agriculture (Emergency Powers) Act 1934 (1934 No 34) (RS Vol 1, p 87) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Civil Defence Act 1983 (1983 No 46) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Civil List Act 1979 (1979 No 33) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Customs Act 1966 (1966 No 19) (RS Vol 2, p 57) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Economic Stabilisation Act 1948 (1948 No 38) (RS Vol 6, p 227) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Foreign Affairs and Overseas Service Act 1983 (1983 No 128) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Government Superannuation Fund Act 1956 (1956 No 47) (RS Vol 13, p 97) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Judicature Act 1908 (1908 No 89) (1957 Reprint, Vol 6, p 699) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Oaths and Declarations Act 1957 (1957 No 88) (RS Vol 4, p 1) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Official Information Act 1982 (1982 No 156) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Ombudsmen Act 1975 (1975 No 9) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Parliamentary Service Act 1985 (1985 No 128) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Petroleum Demand Restraint Act 1981 (1981 No 12) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Primary Products Marketing Act 1953 (1953 No 10) (RS Vol 4, p 201) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Public Finance Act 1977 (1977 No 65) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Public Safety Conservation Act 1932 (1932 No 3) (RS Vol 4, p 233) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Regulations Act 1936 (1936 No 17) (RS Vol 10, p 723) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Statutes Amendment Act 1936 (1936 No 58) (RS Vol 1, p 31) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Treaty of Waitangi Act 1975 (1975 No 114) (RS Vol 8, p 877) - Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Demise of the Crown Act 1908 (1908 No 42) (RS Vol 2, p 323)
Legislature Amendment Act 1977 (1977 No 22) (RS Vol 6, p 764)
New Zealand Constitution Amendment Act 1970 (1970 No 94) (RS Vol 10, p 463)
New Zealand Constitution Amendment Act 1973 (1973 No 114) (RS Vol 10, p 463)
New Zealand Constitution Amendment (Request and Consent) Act 1947 (1947 No 44) (RS Vol 10, p 461)
Royal Powers Act 1983 (1983 No 20)
Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1947 (1947 No 38) (RS Vol 11, p 393)
An Act—
The rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights are affirmed.
This Bill of Rights applies only to acts done—
No court shall, in relation to any enactment (whether passed or made before or after the commencement of this Bill of Rights),—
Subject to section 4, the rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights may be subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified in a free and democratic society.
Wherever an enactment can be given a meaning that is consistent with the rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights, that meaning shall be preferred to any other meaning.
Where any Bill is introduced into the House of Representatives, the Attorney-General shall,—
bring to the attention of the House of Representatives any provision in the Bill that appears to be inconsistent with any of the rights and freedoms contained in this Bill of Rights.
No one shall be deprived of life except on such grounds as are established by law and are consistent with the principles of fundamental justice.
Everyone has the right not to be subjected to torture or to cruel, degrading, or disproportionately severe treatment or punishment.
Every person has the right not to be subjected to medical or scientific experimentation without that person’s consent.
Everyone has the right to refuse to undergo any medical treatment.
Every New Zealand citizen who is of or over the age of 18 years—
Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience, religion, and belief, including the right to adopt and to hold opinions without interference.
Everyone has the right to freedom of expression, including the freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and opinions of any kind in any form.
Every person has the right to manifest that person’s religion or belief in worship, observance, practice, or teaching, either individually or in community with others, and either in public or in private.
Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly.
Everyone has the right to freedom of association.
A person who belongs to an ethnic, religious, or linguistic minority in New Zealand shall not be denied the right, in community with other members of that minority, to enjoy the culture, to profess and practise the religion, or to use the language, of that minority.
Everyone has the right to be secure against unreasonable search or seizure, whether of the person, property, or correspondence or otherwise.
Everyone has the right not to be arbitrarily arrested or detained.
for any offence or suspected offence shall have the right to refrain from making any statement and to be informed of that right.
Everyone who is charged with an offence—
Everyone who is charged with an offence has, in relation to the determination of the charge, the following minimum rights:
An existing right or freedom shall not be held to be abrogated or restricted by reason only that the right or freedom is not included in this Bill of Rights or is included only in part.
Except where the provisions of this Bill of Rights otherwise provide, the provisions of this Bill of Rights apply, so far as practicable, for the benefit of all legal persons as well as for the benefit of all natural persons.
An Act to reform the electoral system and to provide, in particular, if the proposal for the introduction of the mixed member proportional system is carried at the referendum held under the Electoral Referendum Act 1993,—
This Act may be cited as the Electoral Act 1993.
approved electronic medium, in relation to the making of an application or the providing of any information, means an electronic medium approved by the Electoral Commission for the making of that application or the providing of that information
bribery has the meaning assigned to that term by section 216 by-election means any election other than a general election
candidate,—
candidate advertisement means an advertisement in any medium that may reasonably be regarded as encouraging or persuading voters to do either or both of the following:
census means the census of population and dwellings carried out by the Department of Statistics pursuant to the Statistics Act 1975
Chief Electoral Officer means the Chief Electoral Officer appointed under this Act; and includes any person authorised to exercise the powers, duties, and functions of the Chief Electoral Officer
component party means, in relation to a registered political party (in this definition called the registered party) or in relation to a political party that is applying for registration (in this definition called the applicant party),—
constituency candidate means a person who has been nominated as a candidate for a seat in the House of Representatives representing an electoral district
corrupt practice means any act declared by this Act to be a corrupt practice
Corrupt Practices List, in relation to any district, means the Corrupt Practices List made out for that district under section 100
costs includes charges and expenses
Crown means Her Majesty in respect of the Government of New Zealand
current financial member, in relation to a political party, means a member of the party—
district or electoral district or electorate means a General electoral district or a Maori electoral district constituted under this Act
election means an election of a member of the House of Representatives
election advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3A
election expenses,—
elector, in relation to any district, means a person registered, or qualified to be registered, as an elector of that district
Electoral Commission means the Electoral Commission established by section 4B
Electoral Commissioner or Commissioner means a member of the Electoral Commission
electoral official means any person that the Electoral Commission employs or engages for the purpose of assisting with the performance of its functions
electoral roll, in relation to any district, means, subject to sections 101 to 103, the forms of application for registration kept by the Registrar of persons registered as electors of that district (including a form returned following an inquiry under section 89D)
eligible political party means a political party that has at least 500 current financial members who are eligible to enrol as electors
enduring power of attorney means a power of attorney described in section 95 of the Protection of Personal and Property Rights Act 1988
general election means an election that takes place after the dissolution or expiration of Parliament
General electoral district means an electoral district other than a Maori electoral district
General electoral population means total ordinarily resident population as shown in the last periodical census of population and dwellings with the exception of the Maori electoral population
Government means the Government of New Zealand
hospital means a hospital care institution within the meaning of section 58(4) of the Health and Disability Services (Safety) Act 2001
illegal practice means any act declared by this Act to be an illegal practice
issuing officer, in relation to a polling place, means the manager of the polling place or a person authorised, under section 158(3)(a), to issue ballot papers in the polling place
list candidate means any person whose name is specified in a party list submitted to the Electoral Commission under section 127
main roll, in relation to any district, means, subject to section 107, the main roll printed for the district and for the time being in force
manager, in relation to a polling place, means the person designated, under section 158(2), as the manager of the polling place
Maori means a person of the Maori race of New Zealand; and includes any descendant of such a person
Maori electoral district means an electoral district constituted under section 45
Maori electoral population means a figure representing both the persons registered as electors of the Maori electoral districts and a proportion of the persons of New Zealand Maori descent who are not registered as electors of any electoral district and a proportion of the persons of New Zealand Maori descent under the age of 18 years, which figure shall be fixed—
medical practitioner means a health practitioner who is, or is deemed to be, registered with the Medical Council of New Zealand continued by section 114(1)(a) of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act 2003 as a practitioner of the profession of medicine
member of the Defence Force means any person resident in New Zealand within the meaning of this Act who is for the time being a member of the New Zealand Defence Force constituted by section 11(1) of the Defence Act 1990; and includes any person so resident who is attached to, or employed by, or carries out duties of the New Zealand Defence Force which necessitate his or her being outside New Zealand
mental impairment, in relation to any person, means an impairment causing a person to lack, wholly or partly, the capacity to understand the nature of any decision about registering as an elector
meshblock means statistical meshblock
Minister means the Minister of Justice
nomination day, in relation to any election, means the day appointed in the writ for that election as the latest day for the nomination of candidates
party, in Parts 6AA, 6A, and 6B,—
party advertisement means an advertisement in any medium that may reasonably be regarded as encouraging or persuading voters to do either or both of the following:
party secretary or, in relation to a party, secretary means the person (whatever his or her designation or office) whose duties include responsibility for—
permanent resident of New Zealand has the meaning assigned thereto by section 73
personation has the meaning assigned to that term by section 215
polling day, in relation to any election, means the day appointed in the writ for that election for the polling to take place if a poll is required
polling place official means a person appointed, under section 158(1), as an official for a polling place
prescribed means prescribed by this Act or by regulations made thereunder or (for the purposes of Part 8) by rules of court
prison means a prison established or deemed to be established under the Corrections Act 2004
public inspection period means, in relation to a return filed under sections 205K, 206I, 206ZC, 209, 210, 210C, 214C, and 214F, the period—
public money has the same meaning as in the Public Finance Act 1989
public notice or public notification means a notice printed in some newspaper circulating in the district intended to be affected by the notice
public place has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Summary Offences Act 1981
public servant—
Registrar, in relation to any district, means the Registrar of Electors appointed for that district under section 22; and includes his or her deputy
Registrar of Births and Deaths means Registrar within the meaning of section 2 of the Births, Deaths, Marriages, and Relationships Registration Act 1995
regulated period has the meaning given to it by section 3B
representative, in Part 5, means,—
residence and to reside have the meanings assigned thereto by section 72
Returning Officer means an electoral official designated under section 20B; and includes a person authorised to exercise or perform the powers, duties, or functions of a Returning Officer
roll means an electoral roll, a main roll, or a supplementary roll, as the case may be; and includes a composite roll printed under section 107
Speaker means—
special voter, in relation to any election, means a person qualified under this Act to vote as a special voter at that election
statement includes not only words but also pictures, visual images, gestures, and other methods of signifying meaning
supplementary roll, in relation to any district, means a supplementary roll printed for the district and for the time being in force
treating has the meaning assigned to that term by section 217
undue influence has the meaning assigned to that term by section 218
working day means any day of the week other than—
writ means a writ for an election issued under this Act
writ day, in relation to any election, means the day of the issue of the writ for that election.
A reference to a numbered form is a reference to the form so numbered in Schedule 2.
he or she shall not by reason of that membership be deemed to be a public servant, whether or not he or she receives any travelling allowances or travelling expenses.
periodical means a newspaper, magazine, or trade or professional journal that—
give public notice means issue a media statement.
The Electoral Commission must, as soon as practicable after the commencement of the regulated period for a general election, publish in the Gazette notice of—
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, publish, in relation to an election advertisement, means to bring to the notice of a person in any manner—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
The objective of the Electoral Commission is to administer the electoral system impartially, efficiently, effectively, and in a way that—
The appointment of a Judge as a member of the board of the Electoral Commission does not affect the Judge’s tenure of his or her judicial office or the Judge’s rank, title, status, precedence, salary, annual or other allowances, or other rights or privileges as a Judge (including those in relation to superannuation) and, for all purposes, the Judge’s services as a member must be taken to be service as a Judge.
The provisions of Schedule 1 apply to the Electoral Commission and to its proceedings.
The functions of the Electoral Commission are to—
The Electoral Commission must act independently in performing its statutory functions and duties, and exercising its statutory powers, under—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
A Returning Officer may delegate any of his or her functions, duties, or powers, except this power of delegation, to another electoral official.
No delegation under section 20C—
A delegation under section 20C may be revoked at will by—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
No Returning Officer shall hold any official position in any political organisation.
Every Returning Officer shall, before entering on the duties of his or her office, make a declaration in form 1.
The House of Representatives shall have as its members those persons who are elected from time to time in accordance with the provisions of the Electoral Act 1956 or this Act, and who shall be known as members of Parliament.
The Chairperson and every member of the Commission who holds office under section 28(2)(e) or section 28(3)(b), unless he or she sooner ceases to be a member as provided in section 30, shall cease to be a member on the date on which the first periodical census of population is taken after the date of his or her appointment.
The Chairperson or any member of the Commission who holds office under section 28(2)(e) or section 28(3)(b) may resign his or her appointment by writing addressed to the Governor-General, in which case, or in case of any such member being convicted of an offence punishable by imprisonment for life or by 2 or more years’ imprisonment, or of his or her refusing to act, or of his or her death or mental or physical incapacity, or of his or her absence from New Zealand when his or her services are required, the Governor-General may, by Order in Council, appoint another person in his or her stead on the same nomination as in the case of the original appointment: provided that, if Parliament is not in session at the time, an appointment of a member to represent the Government or the Opposition may be made on the nomination of the Prime Minister or of the Leader of the Opposition, as the case may be.
There shall be paid out of money appropriated by Parliament for the purpose to the Chairperson and each member of the Commission who holds office under section 28(2)(e) or section 28(3)(b) remuneration by way of fees, salary, or allowances and travelling allowances and expenses in accordance with the Fees and Travelling Allowances Act 1951, and the provisions of that Act shall apply accordingly, and the Commission shall be a statutory board for the purposes of that Act.
Any political party to which a member of Parliament belongs and any independent member of Parliament and any political party whose candidates have, at the immediately preceding general election, obtained 5% or more of the valid votes cast by electors at that general election may make submissions to the Commission in relation to the matters to be considered by the Commission under section 35(3) or section 45(6).
the Government Statistician shall thereupon report the results of the census and his or her calculation of the Maori electoral population as at the close of the last day of that period to the Surveyor-General and to the other members of the Commission.
Where, in the opinion of the Commission, General electoral districts cannot be formed consistently with the considerations provided for in section 35 so as to contain exactly the quota, the Commission may for any General electoral district make an allowance by way of addition or subtraction of General electoral population to an extent not exceeding 5%.
The Representation Commission, if it is informed by the Remuneration Authority that it requires the districts to be classified for the purposes of determining salaries or allowances or both under the Remuneration Authority Act 1977, shall classify those districts in accordance with the categories given to it by the Remuneration Authority.
No member of the Commission shall, within 2 years after he or she ceases to be a member, be capable of being elected to be a member of the House of Representatives.
The following persons are not qualified to be a candidate or to be elected as a member of Parliament:
Every member of Parliament who sits or votes therein after his or her seat has become vacant by reason of that member having become a public servant or having been appointed as a Returning Officer, knowing that his or her seat is so vacant, shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $400.
The nomination of any person as a candidate for election, or his or her election as a member of Parliament, shall not be questioned on the ground that, though entitled to be registered as an elector of any district, that person was not in fact registered as an elector of that district but was registered as an elector of some other district.
A member of Parliament ceasing to be registered as an elector shall not from that cause only be disqualified from sitting as a member.
the period of leave shall, if the employer so determines after consultation with the State servant, commence before nomination day on a day appointed by the employer.
provided that a candidate who, at the time of his or her nomination or of the inclusion of his or her name in a list submitted under section 127, is a member of the staff of a university or a university college or a technical institute or a community college or a teachers college may continue to teach or supervise the studies of students at that university or university college or technical institute or community college or teachers college who are preparing for an examination and may engage in marking the examination papers of such students, and may receive remuneration in respect of such teaching, supervision, and marking.
Despite section 55(1)(b) and (c), the seat of a member of Parliament does not become vacant by reason only of the member—
[Expired]
[Expired]
[Expired]
[Expired]
[Expired]
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the following persons, and no others, shall be qualified to vote at any election in any district, namely,—
shall action be taken in relation to any application for the registration of a political party.
The Electoral Commission shall refuse an application for the registration of a political party if, in its opinion, the name of the party or any proposed abbreviation—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Members of the public shall be entitled to inspect the Register of Political Parties without payment at any time between 9 am and 5 pm on any day on which the office of the Electoral Commission is open.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Every political party that is for the time being registered under this Part shall ensure that provision is made for participation in the selection of candidates representing the party for election as members of Parliament by—
The secretary of any political party registered under this Act must ensure that the Electoral Commission receives by 30 April in each year a declaration made by the secretary in the manner provided by section 9 of the Oaths and Declarations Act 1957, which declaration must—
No action may be taken in relation to any application made under section 71C during the period that,—
If, on receipt of an application under section 71C, the Electoral Commission determines to register the logo of a political party, the Electoral Commission must—
The Electoral Commission may publish, in any manner that the Electoral Commission considers appropriate, every party logo that is, or has been, registered in the Register of Political Parties.
For the purposes of this Act, a person is a permanent resident of New Zealand if, and only if, that person—
shall (whether or not he or she does so continue to reside in that electoral district) be deemed, for the purposes of subsection (1)(c), to have completed on that Monday a period of 1 month’s continuous residence in that electoral district.
option period means the period specified in a notice published under section 77(2)
person registered as an elector includes a person of or over the age of 17 years who has had an application under section 82(2) to register as an elector accepted by a Registrar of Electors.
Except as provided in sections 76 to 78,—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
A person who is outside New Zealand may apply for registration as an elector under section 83 through a representative, and section 86 applies with any necessary modifications.
A person who has a physical or mental impairment may apply for registration as an elector under section 83 through a representative, and section 86 applies with any necessary modifications.
The Registrar must, not later than 14 days after the registration of a person as an elector, deliver to that person personally, or send to that person by post, written notice of the registration.
Registrar B, in relation to an elector, means the Registrar for the electoral district in which the elector currently resides
roll A, in relation to an elector, means the roll for the electoral district in which the elector previously resided
roll B, in relation to an elector, means the roll for the electoral district in which the elector currently resides.
If a Registrar receives, during an inquiry under section 89D(1), or within 28 days before the commencement of an inquiry under that section, a duly completed application for registration as an elector,—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
notice in writing of the objection, which notice shall include both the name of the objector and the particulars specified by the objector (being particulars sufficient to inform the person objected to of the ground for the objection and the reason or reasons supporting the ground for objection).
Where, within 14 days after the day on which a notice under section 95A(1) or section 96(2) is served on the person objected to,—
Where, within 14 days after the day on which a notice under section 95A(1) or section 96(2) is served on the person objected to,—
provides the Registrar with evidence that satisfies the Registrar that the person objected to is qualified to be on the roll, the name of the person objected to shall be retained on the roll and the Registrar shall notify the parties accordingly.
notice in writing of the objection and of such particulars of the objection as are sufficient to inform the person objected to of the ground for the objection and the reason or reasons supporting the ground for objection.
may place the name of that person on the roll at any time or restore the name of that person to the roll at any time.
the Registrar of the district in which the person should have been registered may, subject to subsection (6), place that person’s name on the roll for that district.
the Registrar shall enter the name, residence, and description of that person and particulars of the conviction or report on a list to be called the Corrupt Practices List.
whichever is the earlier.
provided that a supplementary roll shall be printed as soon as may be after the issue of a writ for an election in the district, and the date for the closing of that roll shall be writ day.
The Electoral Commission—
shall be kept for inspection by the public at the Office of the Registrar of Electors, and at such other places within the district as the Electoral Commission directs.
neither the power of inspection conferred by subsection (3) nor the power to inspect the list when it is made available for public inspection under section 111 includes the power to copy the list.
The objectives of sections 111B to 111F are—
For the purposes of sections 111C to 111F,—
Maori elector means a person registered as an elector who has given written notice to a Registrar that the person is of Maori descent
register of iwi affiliations means a list or lists of persons of Maori descent and their iwi affiliations, together with the information described in section 111C(2) in respect of those persons.
but shall not include any request for a random sample of electors.
decade means a period of 10 years that begins with a year that is divisible, without remainder, by 10.
If the Electoral Commission is required in accordance with this Act to supply information in electronic form, the Electoral Commission is only required to supply that information in a form, or using a medium, that is compatible with computer systems being used by the Electoral Commission at the time.
exercise in respect of that person’s name, and without further evidence or inquiry, the power conferred on the Electoral Commission by that subsection.
any information the production of which contravenes subsection (1).
Every person who knowingly and wilfully makes a false statement in any application, certificate, or information supplied for the purposes of this Part is liable on conviction to—
Every person shall for each offence be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000 who—
Where the Registrar believes that any person has committed an offence against section 119, he or she shall report the facts on which that belief is based to the New Zealand Police.
Every person shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000 who, having obtained possession of an application for registration signed by any other person for the purpose of being delivered to the Registrar for registration, wilfully fails so to deliver it so that the applicant’s name is not entered on the roll.
Whenever Parliament is dissolved or expires, the Governor-General must, not later than 7 days after the dissolution or expiration, issue a writ in form 3 to the Electoral Commission requiring the Electoral Commission to make all necessary arrangements for the conduct of a general election.
[Repealed]
the Electoral Commission shall delete the name of that person from the list and the order of preference in the list shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.
If the component parties of a political party listed in the copy of any declaration received by the Electoral Commission under section 127(3A) differ from those recorded in the Register of Political Parties established by section 62(2), the Electoral Commission—
[Repealed]
Notwithstanding anything in section 129, no writ shall be issued for a by-election to supply a vacancy in the House of Representatives if—
[Repealed]
If after a petition has been presented against the return of any member representing an electoral district his or her seat becomes vacant on any of the grounds mentioned in section 55, no writ to fill the vacancy shall be issued until after the petition has been disposed of, and not then if the court determines that that member was not duly elected or returned and that some other person was duly elected or returned.
[Repealed]
Notwithstanding anything in section 134, no direction shall be issued under that section to the Electoral Commission to supply a vacancy in the House of Representatives if—
the vacancy shall not be filled until the next general election.
Where any vacancy is filled under section 137, or the Electoral Commission determines that the vacancy cannot be filled, the Electoral Commission shall, as soon as is convenient, file with the Clerk of the House of Representatives a return indicating,—
[Repealed]
Immediately after receiving a writ requiring an election to be held in a district, the Electoral Commission must notify the Returning Officer for the district of the following matters:
Sections 146B to 146L provide an alternative to the procedures set out in sections 143 to 146 by which people can be nominated as candidates for election for electoral districts.
Any registered elector may inspect the following material at the Electoral Commission’s office without payment at any time when the office is open for the transaction of business:
in at least 1 newspaper circulating in the district in such manner as the Returning Officer considers most likely to give full publicity thereto.
the Electoral Commission must, in accordance with section 179(2), declare the constituency candidate to be duly elected.
A poll shall be taken by secret ballot at the several polling places of the district on polling day.
a number (called a consecutive number) beginning with the number 1 in the case of the first ballot paper printed, and on all succeeding ballot papers printed the numbers shall be consecutive so that no 2 ballot papers for the district shall bear the same number.
For the purposes of sections 152A to 153H, a candidate is incapacitated if the Returning Officer or, as the case requires, the Electoral Commission is satisfied that, because the candidate is suffering from a serious illness or has sustained a serious injury,—
The provisions of this Act as to an equality of votes between constituency candidates apply even though, after the close of the poll, one of those candidates dies or the nomination of one of those candidates is cancelled on the grounds of incapacity.
master, in relation to any ship, includes any person (except a pilot) having command or charge of the ship
worker has the same meaning as that given to employee in section 6 of the Employment Relations Act 2000.
No person not actually engaged in voting may remain in a polling place other than the following:
If any person proposing to vote at any election gives as his or her name the name of any person to whom a ballot paper has already been given at the same election, he or she shall be dealt with in all respects in like manner as any other voter: provided that the ballot paper of any such person shall not be deposited in the ballot box or allowed by the issuing officer, but shall be set aside for separate custody.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
the Returning Officer shall allow the vote of that voter and shall disallow the other vote or votes.
the Returning Officer shall allow the vote of that voter and shall disallow the other vote or votes.
provided that no ballot paper or part of the ballot paper shall be rejected as informal by reason only of some informality in the manner in which it or any other part of the ballot paper has been dealt with by the voter if the ballot paper or part of the ballot paper being considered is otherwise regular, and if, in the opinion of the Returning Officer, the intention of the voter is clearly indicated:
provided also that no ballot paper or part of a ballot paper shall be rejected as informal by reason only of some error or omission on the part of an official, if the Returning Officer is satisfied that the voter was qualified to vote at the election:
Nothing in section 180 or section 181 requires the electorate votes or the party votes to be the subject of more than 1 recount and, where more than 1 application is received that would involve recounts of the same votes or of both parts of the same ballot papers, those applications may be combined by the District Court Judge conducting the recount.
may appoint 1 or more scrutineers to be present at any such recount.
the Electoral Commission must, for the purposes of applying subsection (7), deduct from the number of 120 the number of any such persons.
provided that this paragraph shall not restrict the publication by radio or television broadcast made by a broadcaster within the meaning of section 2 of the Broadcasting Act 1989 of—
provided that this paragraph shall not apply to any statement, name, emblem, slogan, or logo in a newspaper published before 6 pm on the day before polling day:
provided also that where any statement, name, emblem, slogan, or logo which does not relate specifically to the election campaign and which is so exhibited before polling day in a fixed position and in relation to the New Zealand or regional or campaign headquarters (not being mobile headquarters) of a political party, it shall not be an offence to leave the statement, name, emblem, slogan, or logo so exhibited on polling day:
provided further that this paragraph shall not restrict the publication of any party name in any news which relates to an election and which is published in a newspaper or other periodical or in a radio or television broadcast made by a broadcaster within the meaning of section 2 of the Broadcasting Act 1989:
provided further that this paragraph shall not apply to ribbons, streamers, rosettes, or items of a similar nature, which are worn or displayed by any person (not being an electoral official) on his or her person or on any vehicle in party colours or to a party lapel badge worn by any person (not being an electoral official):
All expenses incurred by the Returning Officer in carrying out the power conferred by section 198(1) may be recovered by the Returning Officer from the persons by whom or by whose direction the statement, name, emblem, slogan, or logo was exhibited, as a debt due by them jointly and severally to the Crown.
Every person is guilty of a corrupt practice who, with the intention of influencing the vote of any elector, at any time on polling day before the close of the poll, or at any time on any of the 2 days immediately preceding polling day, publishes, distributes, broadcasts, or exhibits, or causes to be published, distributed, broadcast, or exhibited, in or in view of any public place a statement of fact that the person knows is false in a material particular.
Every person shall be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000 who erases, obliterates, or alters any official mark, stamp, or writing on any ballot paper, or places thereon any writing, print, or other matter which might lead persons to believe that it was put thereon by any official or person duly authorised in that behalf.
In any prosecution for an offence in relation to any ballot boxes, ballot papers, or marking instruments at an election, the property in the boxes, ballot papers, and instruments may be stated as being in the Returning Officer.
Every person who commits an offence against section 203 is guilty of a corrupt practice.
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
contact details for a person means that person’s—
election advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3A
promoter means a person who initiates or instigates an election advertisement that—
register means the register of registered promoters established and maintained under section 204R
registered promoter—
unregistered promoter means a promoter who is not—
A promoter (including a corporation sole, a body corporate, and an unincorporated body) is eligible to be a registered promoter if the promoter is not—
The Electoral Commission must refuse an application by a promoter to be registered if—
A registered promoter must give written notice to the Electoral Commission of any change in the information provided under section 204L(2) within 10 working days after the change.
Unless earlier cancelled under section 204P, a promoter’s registration expires on the close of polling day for the next election following the date of the promoter’s registration.
The purposes of the register are—
The register may be kept—
The Electoral Commission may at any time make any amendments to the register that are necessary to—
The Electoral Commission must—
A person may search the register for a purpose set out in section 204S.
A search of the register for personal information that has not been carried out for a purpose specified in section 204S constitutes an action that is an interference with the privacy of an individual under section 66 of the Privacy Act 1993.
candidate advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3(1)
election advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3A
election expenses, in relation to a candidate,—
party advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3(1).
An election expense in relation to a candidate advertisement may only be incurred by—
Every person is guilty of—
Every payment made in respect of any election expenses of a candidate, other than a payment that is less than $50, must be vouched by an invoice stating the particulars and by a receipt.
If a candidate considers that there is no relevant information to disclose under section 205K, the candidate must file a nil return under that section.
[Repealed]
Nothing in this subpart validates any use of public money that would otherwise be unlawful.
candidate advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3(1)
election advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3A
election expenses, in relation to a party,—
party advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3(1).
An election expense in relation to a party advertisement may only be incurred by—
Every person is guilty of—
Every payment made in respect of any election expenses of a party, other than a payment that is less than $100, must be vouched by an invoice stating the particulars and by a receipt.
A person is eligible to be appointed as an auditor under section 206J unless that person is—
If a party secretary considers that there is no relevant information to disclose under section 206I, the party secretary must file a nil return under that section.
Nothing in this subpart validates any use of public money that would otherwise be unlawful.
election advertisement has the meaning given to it by section 3A
election expenses, in relation to a registered promoter,—
registered promoter has the meaning given to it by section 204A.
An election expense in relation to an election advertisement promoted by a registered promoter may only be incurred by—
Every person is guilty of—
candidate donation means a donation (whether of money or of the equivalent of money or of goods or services or of a combination of those things) that is made to a candidate, or to any person on the candidate’s behalf, for use in the candidate’s campaign for election and—
contribution means any thing (being money or the equivalent of money or goods or services or a combination of those things) that makes up a donation or is included in a donation or has been used to wholly or partly fund a donation, and that—
contributor means a person who makes a contribution and who immediately before making the contribution—
donation funded from contributions means a donation that is made up of, includes, or is wholly or partly funded from 1 or more contributions
donor means a person who makes a donation
party donation means a donation (whether of money or of the equivalent of money or of goods or services or of a combination of those things) that is made to a party, or to any person or body of persons on behalf of the party who are involved in the administration of the affairs of the party, and—
receive, in relation to a donation, means to get a donation that has been given or sent by—
transmitter means a person to whom a donor gives or sends a donation for transmittal to a candidate or party.
All references to an amount or value of a donation or contribution are inclusive of any goods and services tax incurred by the donor or contributor in respect of the goods or service donated or contributed.
A donor who fails to comply with section 207C with the intention of concealing the identity of any or all of the contributors commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $40,000.
A transmitter who fails to comply with section 207E with the intention of concealing the identity of the donor or any or all of the contributors commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $40,000.
A person who fails to comply with section 207G with the intention of concealing the identity of the donor commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $40,000.
[Repealed]
In this subpart, unless the context otherwise requires,—
donation protected from disclosure means a donation made under section 208A(2) in accordance with section 208A(3).
The Electoral Commission—
If a candidate considers that there is no relevant information to disclose under section 209, the candidate must file a nil return under that section.
[Repealed]
If a party secretary considers that there is no relevant information to disclose under section 210, the party secretary must file a nil return under that section.
This Part applies to loans entered into on behalf of parties.
In this Part,—
loan—
loan amount means—
registered bank has the same meaning as in section 2(1) of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989.
A person is guilty of—
A person who enters into an agreement, arrangement, or understanding with any other person for the purpose of circumventing section 213, or for the purpose of circumventing the disclosure required by section 214C or 214F, is guilty of an illegal practice.
If a party secretary considers that there is no relevant information to disclose under section 214C, the party secretary must file a nil return under that section.
or who, upon or in consequence of any such gift or procurement as aforesaid, procures, or engages, promises, or endeavours to procure, the return of any person or candidates at any election or the vote of any voter.
Where any person knowingly provides money for any purpose which is contrary to the provisions of this Act, or for any election expenses incurred in excess of the maximum amount allowed by this Act, or for repaying any money expended in any such payment or expenses, that person is guilty of an illegal practice.
[Repealed]
Every person is guilty of an illegal practice who induces or procures to vote at any election any person whom he or she knows at the time to be disqualified or prohibited, whether under this Act or otherwise, from voting at that election.
Any person charged with a corrupt practice may, if the circumstances warrant that finding, be found guilty of an illegal practice; and any person charged with an illegal practice may be found guilty of that offence notwithstanding that the act constituting the offence amounted to a corrupt practice.
[Repealed]
If any person, while his or her name is on the Corrupt Practices List for any district, votes or applies for a ballot paper or applies to vote as a special voter at any election in that or any other district, he or she shall, notwithstanding that his or her name may be on the main roll or any supplementary roll, be liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $4,000, and his or her vote shall be void.
Where the name of any person is entered on the Corrupt Practices List for any district by reason of any conviction or any report by the High Court, and any witness who gave evidence against that person in the proceedings resulting in that conviction or report is convicted of perjury in respect of that evidence, that person may apply to the High Court, and that court, if satisfied that the conviction or report so far as it relates to that person was based on perjury, may order that the name of that person be removed from the Corrupt Practices List.
Where more petitions than 1 are presented relating to the same election or return, all those petitions shall be dealt with as 1 petition.
Where a candidate who has been elected at any election is proved at the trial of an election petition to which section 229(3) applies to have been guilty of any corrupt practice at the election, his or her election shall be void.
Where, on the trial of an election petition to which section 229(3) applies claiming the seat for any person, a constituency candidate is reported by the High Court to have been proved guilty of bribery, treating, or undue influence in respect of any person who voted at the election, there shall, on a scrutiny, be struck off from the number of votes appearing to have been received by the candidate 1 vote for every person who voted at the election and is reported to have been proved to have been so bribed, treated, or unduly influenced.
On the trial of any election petition,—
No election shall be declared invalid by reason of—
if the court is satisfied that the election was so conducted as to be substantially in compliance with the law as to elections, and that the failure, omission, irregularity, want, defect, absence, mistake, or breach did not affect the result of the election.
All decisions of the High Court under this Part shall be final and conclusive and without appeal, and shall not be questioned in any way.
At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition to which section 229(3) applies, the court shall determine whether the member whose election or return is complained of, or any and what other person, was duly elected or returned, or whether the election was void, and shall forthwith certify in writing the determination to the Speaker, and the determination so certified shall be final to all intents and purposes.
the constituency candidate shall not be treated for the purposes of this Act as having been reported to have been proved guilty of the offences mentioned in the report.
At the same time as the court gives its certificate at the conclusion of the trial of an election petition to which section 229(3) applies, the court may make a special report to the Speaker as to any matters arising in the course of the trial an account of which, in the judgment of the court, ought to be submitted to the House of Representatives.
In every case of the withdrawal of an election petition to which section 229(3) applies, the High Court shall make a report to the Speaker stating whether in its opinion the withdrawal of the petition was the result of any corrupt arrangement or in consideration of the withdrawal of any other election petition and, if so, the circumstances attending the withdrawal.
Where the High Court reports that certain persons named have been proved at the trial of an election petition to have been guilty of any corrupt or illegal practice, the report shall be given to the Attorney-General.
An election petition under section 258 shall be presented within 28 days of the date of the declaration made under section 193(5) by the Electoral Commission.
On the hearing of a petition presented pursuant to section 258, no decision shall be subject to challenge on the grounds—
Where any petition is presented under section 258, the provisions of sections 232 to 235, subsections (1) to (3) and (8) of section 236, sections 240 to 242, sections 245 to 250, and section 252 (other than subsection (2)), shall apply, with any necessary modifications, as if references to the High Court were references to the Court of Appeal.
At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition to which section 258 applies, the Court of Appeal shall—
responsible department means the department of State that is, with the authority of the Prime Minister, responsible for the administration of the Immigration Act 2009.
Registrars of Electors shall be exempt from the payment of any court fees in respect of any proceedings under this Act.
Where anything is omitted to be done or cannot be done at the time required by or under this Act, or is done before or after that time, or is otherwise irregularly done in matter of form, or sufficient provision is not made by or under this Act, the Governor-General may, by Order in Council published in the Gazette, at any time before or after the time within which the thing is required to be done, extend that time, or validate anything so done before or after the time required or so irregularly done in matter of form, or make other provision for the case as he or she thinks fit:
provided that this section shall not apply with respect to the presentation of an election petition or to the giving of security for costs in relation to an election petition.
The Governor-General may from time to time, by Order in Council, make regulations for all or any of the following purposes:
provided that this section shall not apply to the repeal of any reserved provision by a consolidating Act in which that provision is re-enacted without amendment and this section is re-enacted without amendment so as to apply to that provision as re-enacted.
shall, without further appointment, be deemed, as from the commencement of this section, to have been duly appointed under this Act.
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
The enactments specified in Schedule 3 are hereby repealed.
[Schedules omitted due to length - full text available at http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/1993/0087/latest/whole.html?search=ts_act%40bill%40regulation%40deemedreg_electoral+act_resel_25_a&p=1#DLM307519]
This Act is the Electoral Amendment Act 2009.
This Act comes into force on 1 March 2009.
This Act amends the Electoral Act 1993.
Until 1 March 2010, section 210C(3) of the principal Act must be read as if the reference to subsection (2) of that section was a reference to subsection (2) of that section or section 54(2) of the Electoral Finance Act 2007.
Sections 17 and 18 of this Act do not limit section 19 of the Interpretation Act 1999 (which enables the investigation and prosecution of offences committed under the Electoral Finance Act 2007 before it was repealed).
Section 23 expires on the close of 1 March 2011 and on the close of that date is repealed.
This Act is the Electoral (Administration) Amendment Act 2010.
This Act amends the Electoral Act 1993.
In this Part, unless the context requires otherwise,—
existing Electoral Commission means the Electoral Commission established by section 4 of the principal Act
new Electoral Commission means the Electoral Commission established by section 4B of the principal Act as inserted by section 4 of this Act
previous employer, in relation to a transferred employee, means the employer of that employee immediately before 1 October 2010
transferred employee means a person who,—
Until the close of 30 September 2010, the new Electoral Commission may perform only those functions that are necessary or desirable to bring, or in connection with bringing, the principal Act as amended by this Act into operation.
The existing Electoral Commission is not required to produce a statement of intent for the financial year commencing 1 July 2010.
On 1 October 2010, all assets, records, liabilities, and debts of the existing Electoral Commission vest in the new Electoral Commission.
The appointment of the existing Chief Electoral Officer is revoked.
This Act is the Electoral (Disqualification of Sentenced Prisoners) Amendment Act 2010.
This Act comes into force on the day after the date on which it receives the Royal assent.
This Act amends the Electoral Act 1993.
To avoid doubt,—
This Act is the Electoral (Finance Reform and Advance Voting) Amendment Act 2010.
This Act comes into force on 1 January 2011.
For the avoidance of doubt,—
This Act is the Electoral (Administration) Amendment Act 2011.
This Act amends the Electoral Act 1993.
online re-enrolment and updating provisions means sections 82(4A), 83A(3), and 90(2A) of the principal Act (as inserted by sections 8, 9, and 11 of this Act).
At the close of 30 June 2012,—
No person is entitled to compensation or any other payment or benefit in respect of—
Expenses incurred before 1 July 2012 by New Zealand Post Limited in the administration of Part 5 of the principal Act (regardless of whether those expenses arise from commitments New Zealand Post Limited entered into before, on, or after 17 August 2009) must, despite the repeal (by section 32 of this Act) of section 23 of the principal Act, be paid out of public money appropriated by Parliament.
Expenses incurred after 30 June 2012 by New Zealand Post Limited in the administration of Part 5 of the principal Act and arising from commitments New Zealand Post Limited entered into before 18 August 2009 must be paid by the Electoral Commission out of public money appropriated by Parliament.
Expenses incurred after 30 June 2012 by New Zealand Post Limited in the administration of Part 5 of the principal Act and arising from commitments New Zealand Post Limited entered into after 17 August 2009 and before 1 July 2012 may, with the approval of the Minister of Finance, be paid by the Crown or by the Electoral Commission (in either case) out of public money appropriated by Parliament.
A matter or thing commenced under any enactment by the Chief Registrar of Electors and not completed before 1 July 2012 may be completed by the Electoral Commission.
Proceedings relating to an existing right, interest, title, immunity, or duty, commenced by or against (or commenced by or against the Crown in respect of an act or omission of) the Chief Registrar of Electors, and not completed before 1 July 2012 may be completed by the Electoral Commission.
An Act to consolidate and amend the Race Relations Act 1971 and the Human Rights Commission Act 1977 and to provide better protection of human rights in New Zealand in general accordance with United Nations Covenants or Conventions on Human Rights
actuary means—
Chief Commissioner means the Commissioner appointed as the Chief Human Rights Commissioner under section 8(1)(a)
Commission means the Human Rights Commission continued by section 4 and includes the Office of Human Rights Proceedings
Commissioner means a member of the Commission
Director of Human Rights Proceedings or Director means the Director of Human Rights Proceedings or alternate Director of Human Rights Proceedings appointed under section 20A
dispose, in sections 53 and 54, includes sell, assign, lease, let, sublease, sublet, license, or mortgage, and agree to dispose
dispute resolution meeting means a meeting of the kind referred to in section 77(2)(c)
dispute resolution services includes the provision of answers to questions by members of the public about discrimination and compliance with this Act
employer, in Part 2, includes—
employment agreement has the meaning given to that term by section 5 of the Employment Relations Act 2000
employment contract has the meaning given to that term by section 2 of the Employment Contracts Act 1991
Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner means the Commissioner appointed as the Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner under section 8(1)(c)
general manager means the general manager of the Commission appointed by the Chief Commissioner under section 18; and includes any acting general manager of the Commission
Human Rights Review Tribunal or Tribunal means the Tribunal continued by section 93
Minister means the Minister of Justice
Office of Human Rights Proceedings or Office means the office referred to in section 20
prohibited ground of discrimination has the meaning given to it by section 21
Race Relations Commissioner means the Commissioner appointed as the Race Relations Commissioner under section 8(1)(b)
relative, in relation to any person, means any other person who—
residential accommodation, in sections 53 and 54, includes accommodation in a dwellinghouse, flat, hotel, motel, boardinghouse, or camping ground
superannuation scheme means any superannuation scheme, fund, or plan, or any provident fund, set up to confer, on its members or other persons, retirement or other benefits, such as accident, disability, sickness, or death benefits
trustees, in relation to a superannuation scheme, includes the person or persons appointed to administer a superannuation scheme constituted under an Act of Parliament of New Zealand.
This Act shall bind the Crown.
In recommending a person for appointment as Chief Commissioner, the Minister must have regard not only to the criteria stated in section 11 but also to the person’s—
In recommending a person for appointment as Race Relations Commissioner, the Minister must have regard not only to the criteria stated in section 11 but also to the person’s—
In recommending a person for appointment as the Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner, the Minister must have regard not only to the criteria stated in section 11 but also to the person’s—
The Race Relations Commissioner has the following functions:
The Equal Employment Opportunities Commissioner has the following functions:
Except as expressly provided otherwise in this or another Act, the Commission must act independently in performing its statutory functions and duties, and exercising its statutory powers, under—
[Repealed]
The office holder—
The office holder—
The purpose of this Part is to provide that, in general, an act or omission that is inconsistent with the right to freedom from discrimination affirmed by section 19 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 is in breach of this Part if the act or omission is that of a person or body referred to in section 3 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990.
Section 20L applies only for the purposes of—
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or circulate any form of application for employment or to make any inquiry of or about any applicant for employment which indicates, or could reasonably be understood as indicating, an intention to commit a breach of section 22.
Nothing in section 22 shall apply to the employment or an application for employment of a person on a ship or aircraft, not being a New Zealand ship or aircraft, if the person employed or seeking employment was engaged or applied for it outside New Zealand.
Nothing in section 22 shall prevent different treatment based on sex, religious or ethical belief, or age if the duties of the position in respect of which that treatment is accorded—
Nothing in section 22 shall prevent different treatment based on political opinion where the position is one as—
Nothing in section 22 shall prevent restrictions imposed by an employer—
[Repealed]
No employer shall be entitled, by virtue of any of the exceptions in this Part, to accord to any person in respect of any position different treatment based on a prohibited ground of discrimination even though some of the duties of that position would fall within any of those exceptions if, with some adjustment of the activities of the employer (not being an adjustment involving unreasonable disruption of the activities of the employer), some other employee could carry out those particular duties.
by reason of any of the prohibited grounds of discrimination.
by reason of any of the prohibited grounds of discrimination.
It shall be unlawful for any organisation or association which has as its function or one of its principal functions the provision of training, or facilities or opportunities for training (including facilities or opportunities by way of financial grants), that would help to fit a person for any employment, or for any person acting or purporting to act on behalf of any such organisation or association,—
by reason of any of the prohibited grounds of discrimination.
Nothing in section 44 shall prevent the holding of courses, or the provision of counselling, restricted to persons of a particular sex, race, ethnic or national origin, or sexual orientation where highly personal matters, such as sexual matters or the prevention of violence, are involved.
Section 44 shall not apply to the maintenance or provision of separate facilities or services for each sex on the ground of public decency or public safety.
Where the nature of a skill varies according to whether it is exercised in relation to men or women, a person does not commit a breach of section 44 by exercising the skill in relation to one sex only, in accordance with that person’s normal practice.
It shall not be a breach of section 44 to provide group travel services which are expressed to be solely for the benefit of persons in a particular age group.
It shall not be a breach of section 44 to provide goods, services, or facilities at a reduced fee, charge, or rate on the ground of age, disability, or employment status, whether or not there are conditions applicable to the reduced fee, charge, or rate.
It shall not be a breach of section 44 for a person who supplies facilities or services—
Nothing in section 53 shall apply to residential accommodation which is to be shared with the person disposing of the accommodation, or on whose behalf it is disposed of.
Nothing in section 53 shall apply to accommodation in any hostel or in any establishment (such as a hospital, club, school, university, religious institution, or retirement village), or in any part of a hostel or any such establishment, where accommodation is provided only for persons of the same sex, marital status, or religious or ethical belief, or for persons with a particular disability, or for persons in a particular age group.
by reason of any of the prohibited grounds of discrimination.
Nothing in section 57 shall prevent the holding or provision, at any educational establishment, of courses or counselling restricted to persons of a particular sex, race, ethnic or national origin, or sexual orientation, where highly personal matters, such as sexual matters or the prevention of violence, are involved.
being matter or words likely to excite hostility against or bring into contempt any group of persons in or who may be coming to New Zealand on the ground of the colour, race, or ethnic or national origins of that group of persons.
[Repealed]
Where any conduct, practice, requirement, or condition that is not apparently in contravention of any provision of this Part has the effect of treating a person or group of persons differently on 1 of the prohibited grounds of discrimination in a situation where such treatment would be unlawful under any provision of this Part other than this section, that conduct, practice, condition, or requirement shall be unlawful under that provision unless the person whose conduct or practice is in issue, or who imposes the condition or requirement, establishes good reason for it.
by a person who is a customer or a client of the employee’s employer, the employee may make a complaint in writing about that request or behaviour to the employee’s employer.
that employer shall be deemed to have committed a breach of this Act and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly.
by reason of the disability or age of those members, if the different treatment—
The Commission shall from time to time, after consultation with the FMA, report to the Minister on whether discrimination on the prohibited grounds has been eliminated from superannuation schemes.
For the avoidance of doubt it is hereby declared that preferential treatment granted by reason of—
The object of this Part is to establish procedures that—
Services provided under section 77 may be provided in any manner, including—
Any statement, admission, document, or information disclosed or made to the mediator at a dispute resolution meeting for the purposes of the dispute resolution meeting must not be made available under the Official Information Act 1982 or the Local Government Official Information and Meetings Act 1987 by a person to whom section 85(1) applies, except with the consent of the parties or the relevant party.
Nothing in section 80(1) or sections 85 to 87—
A settlement between parties to a complaint may be enforced by proceedings before the Tribunal brought under section 92B(4)—
Proceedings before the Tribunal are to be commenced by the lodging of an application in the prescribed form.
The Human Rights Review Tribunal must refer the granting of a remedy in any proceedings under section 92B or section 92E to the High Court if the Tribunal is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that a defendant in the proceedings has committed a breach of Part 1A or Part 2 or the terms of a settlement of a complaint, but that—
The Tribunal constituted by section 45 of the Human Rights Commission Act 1977 and, immediately before 1 January 2002 (being the date of the commencement of the Human Rights Amendment Act 2001), known as the Complaints Review Tribunal shall continue in being, and, on and after 1 January 2002, is called the Human Rights Review Tribunal.
The functions of the Tribunal shall be—
Where an interim order has been made, the defendant may, with the leave of the Tribunal and instead of appealing against the order, apply to the High Court to vary or rescind the order unless that order was made with the defendant’s consent.
The Tribunal shall consist of—
The Tribunal must notify the Attorney-General promptly of the bringing of proceedings before the Tribunal alleging a breach of Part 1A, or alleging a breach of Part 2 by a person or body referred to in section 3 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990, if the Attorney-General is not a party to the proceedings.
Witnesses and counsel appearing before the Tribunal shall have the same privileges and immunities as witnesses and counsel have in proceedings in a District Court.
The Tribunal may at any time dismiss any proceedings brought under section 92B or section 92E if it is satisfied that they are trivial, frivolous, or vexatious or are not brought in good faith.
The Tribunal shall have a seal, which shall be judicially noticed in all courts and for all purposes.
No member of the Tribunal shall be personally liable for any act done or omitted to be done by the Tribunal or any member thereof in good faith in pursuance or intended pursuance of the functions, duties, powers, or authorities of the Tribunal.
The High Court shall have power to make such order as to the whole or any part of the costs of an appeal under section 123 as may seem just but every order for costs shall follow the outcome of the appeal unless the court otherwise orders.
there shall be 2 additional members of the court who shall be persons appointed by a Judge of the court for the purposes of the hearing or appeal from the panel maintained by the Minister under section 101.
No prosecution for an offence against section 131 shall be instituted without the consent of the Attorney-General.
there has been a breach of any of the provisions of Part 2, the person or authority, in addition to any other powers which that person or authority has, but subject to subsection (2), may refuse to renew or may revoke or cancel any such licence or registration, as the case may require, or may impose any other penalty authorised by the enactment, whether by way of censure, fine, or otherwise.
when that refusal or requirement is in breach of any of the provisions of Part 2.
No prosecution for an offence against section 134 shall be instituted without the consent of the Attorney-General.
A condition, whether oral or contained in a deed, will, or other instrument, which restrains or has the effect of restraining a person from marrying or entering into a civil union or de facto relationship shall be void if the person or class of person whom the person subject to the condition may or may not marry or enter into a civil union or de facto relationship with is identified or defined, expressly or by implication, by reference to the colour, race, or ethnic or national origins of the person or class of person.
The Commission must not, in any report or statement made pursuant to this Act, make any comment that is adverse to any person unless that person has been given an opportunity to be heard.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Every person commits an offence against this Act and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $3,000 who—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
On the commencement of this section, the assets and liabilities of the Race Relations Conciliator vest in the Commission.
Any proceedings to which the Race Relations Conciliator was a party or that he or she was considering bringing, before the commencement of this section, may be brought, continued, completed, and enforced by or against the Commission.
The Commission must perform the duties that the Race Relations Conciliator would have had to perform under section 41 of the Public Finance Act 1989 if the Human Rights Amendment Act 2001 had not been enacted, for the period beginning on 1 July 2001 and ending with the close of 31 December 2001.
From the commencement of this section, unless the context otherwise requires, every reference to the Proceedings Commissioner in any instrument, document, or notice is to be read as a reference to the Director.
The Complaints Division of the Commission is abolished.
No act or omission that occurred before 1 January 2002 is capable of being in breach of Part 1A unless—
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
In this schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
functions include powers or duties
Office means the Office of Human Rights Proceedings referred to in section 20.
[Repealed]
Sections 47 and 48 and 120 to 126 of the Crown Entities Act 2004 apply to the Director, with all necessary modifications, as if he or she were a member of the Commission.
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
The address for service of the Director and of the Office is the address of the main premises of the Office.
[Repealed]
Public Act: 1994 No 138
Date of assent: 9 December 1994
Commencement: 9 December 1994
This Act may be cited as the Human Rights Amendment Act 1994, and shall be read together with and deemed part of the Human Rights Act 1993 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”).
without providing a similar or corresponding or equivalent benefit on the death of other members of the scheme.
This Act is the Supreme Court Act 2003.
This Act comes into force on 1 January 2004.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Chief Justice means the Chief Justice of New Zealand appointed under section 4(1) of the Judicature Act 1908
civil proceeding—
decision means a judgment, decree, order, direction, or determination
District Court includes—
High Court includes the High Court sitting in its admiralty jurisdiction, or sitting as a permanent Prize Court under the jurisdiction conferred by section 8 of the Admiralty Act 1973
interlocutory application—
New Zealand court means—
permanent Judge means a Judge of the Supreme Court who is not an acting Judge
Privy Council means the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council
Registrar means the Registrar of the Supreme Court appointed under section 36(1)
Supreme Court and the Court mean the Supreme Court of New Zealand established by section 6
working day means a day of the week other than—
This Act binds the Crown.
This section establishes as the court of final appeal for New Zealand a court of record called the Supreme Court of New Zealand.
The Supreme Court can hear and determine an appeal by a party to a civil proceeding in the Court of Appeal against any decision made in the proceeding, unless—
The Supreme Court can hear and determine an appeal by a party to a civil proceeding in the High Court against any decision made in the proceeding, unless—
The Supreme Court can hear and determine an appeal against a decision made in a civil proceeding in a New Zealand court other than the Court of Appeal or the High Court to the extent only that an enactment other than this Act provides for the bringing of an appeal to the Supreme Court against the decision.
The Supreme Court can hear and determine appeals authorised by—
Sections 7 to 10 are subject to—
The Supreme Court must not give leave to appeal directly to it against a decision made, a conviction entered, or a sentence imposed, in a proceeding in a New Zealand court other than the Court of Appeal unless (in addition to being satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of justice for the Court to hear and determine the proposed appeal) it is satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that justify taking the proposed appeal directly to the Supreme Court.
A Judge of the Supreme Court holds office until he or she ceases to hold office as a permanent Judge of the High Court.
Appeals to the Supreme Court proceed by way of rehearing.
The Supreme Court can also remit a proceeding that began in a New Zealand court to any New Zealand court that has jurisdiction to deal with it.
A judgment, decree, or order of the Supreme Court may be enforced by the High Court as if it had been given or made by the High Court.
All fees received under this Act must be paid into a Crown Bank Account.
The Registrar, Deputy Registrars, and other officers of the Supreme Court have the powers and duties prescribed by rules made under section 51C of the Judicature Act 1908.
Sections 99B to 99D of the Judicature Act 1908 (which relate to the appointment of technical advisers to give advice in appeals in proceedings involving questions arising from expert evidence) apply to the Supreme Court and proceedings in the Supreme Court as if references in those sections to the Court of Appeal were references to the Supreme Court.
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
Amendment(s) incorporated in the Act(s).
The enactments specified in Part 1 of Schedule 1 are amended in the manner indicated in that schedule.
On 1 January 2004, the following Imperial enactments cease to have effect as part of the law of New Zealand:
[Schedules omitted due to length - full text available online at http://www.legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2003/0053/latest/whole.html#DLM214531]
