Whereas sovereignty over the entire Universe belongs to Almighty Allah alone, and the authority to be exercised by the people of Pakistan within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust;
And whereas it is the will of the people of Pakistan to establish an order;
Wherein the State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people;
Wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice, as enunciated by Islam, shall be fully observed;
Wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in the individual and collective spheres in accordance with the teachings and requirements of Islam as set out in the Holy Quran and Sunnah;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made for the minorities freely to profess and practise their religions and develop their cultures;
Wherein the territories now included in or in accession with Pakistan and such other territories as may hereafter be included in or accede to Pakistan shall form a Federation wherein the units will be autonomous with such boundaries and limitations on their powers and authority as may be prescribed;
Wherein shall be guaranteed fundamental rights, including equality of status, of opportunity and before law, social, economic and political justice, and freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship and association, subject to law and public morality;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made to safeguard the legitimate interests of minorities and backward and depressed classes;
Wherein the independence of the judiciary shall be fully secured;
Wherein the integrity of the territories of the Federation, its independence and all its rights, including its sovereign rights on land, sea and air, shall be safeguarded;
So that the people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the World and make their full contribution towards international peace and progress and happiness of humanity;
Now, therefore, we, the people of Pakistan;
Conscious of our responsibility before Almighty Allah and men;
Cognisant of the sacrifices made by the people in the cause of Pakistan;
Faithful to the declaration made by the Founder of Pakistan, Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah, that Pakistan would be a democratic State based on Islamic principles of social justice;
Dedicated to the preservation of democracy achieved by the unremitting struggle of the people against oppression and tyranny;
Inspired by the resolve to protect our national and political unity and solidarity by creating an egalitarian society through a new order;
Do hereby, through our representatives in the National Assembly, adopt, enact and give to ourselves, this Constitution.
Islam shall be the State religion of Pakistan.
The principles and provisions set out in the Objectives Resolution reproduced in the Annex are hereby made substantive part of the Constitution and shall have effect accordingly.
The State shall ensure the elimination of all forms of exploitation and the gradual fulfillment of the fundamental principle, from each according to his ability to each according to his work.
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, "the State" means the Federal Government, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), a Provincial Government, a Provincial Assembly, and such local or other authorities in Pakistan as are by law empowered to impose any tax or cess.
and no such law nor any provision thereof shall be void on the ground that such law or provision is inconsistent with, or repugnant to, any provision of this Chapter.
Provided that the appropriate Legislature may by resolution extend the said period of two years by a period not exceeding six months.
Explanation.- If in respect of any law Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) is the appropriate Legislature, such resolution shall be a resolution of the National Assembly.
No person shall be deprived of life or liberty save in accordance with law.
Explanation I.- In this Article, "the appropriate Review Board" means,
Explanation II.-The opinion of a Review Board shall be expressed in terms of the views of the majority of its members.
Provided that the authority making any such order may refuse to disclose facts which such authority considers it to be against the public interest to disclose.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any person who is employed by, or works for, or acts on instructions received from, the enemy, or who is acting or attempting to act in a manner prejudicial to the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or any part thereof or who commits or attempts to commit any act which amounts to an anti-national activity as defined in a Federal law or is a member of any association which has for its objects, or which indulges in, any such anti national activity.
For the determination of his civil rights and obligations or in any criminal charge against him a person shall be entitled to a fair trial and due process.
Provided that no compulsory service shall be of a cruel nature or incompatible with human dignity.
No person-
Every citizen shall have the right to remain in, and, subject to any reasonable restriction imposed by law in the public interest, enter and move freely throughout Pakistan and to reside and settle in any part thereof.
Every citizen shall have the right to assemble peacefully and without arms, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of public order.
Subject to such qualifications, if any, as may be prescribed by law, every citizen shall have the right to enter upon any lawful profession or occupation, and to conduct any lawful trade or business:
Provided that nothing in this Article shall prevent-
Every citizen shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, and there shall be freedom of the press, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or defence of Pakistan or any part thereof, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, commission of or incitement to an offence.
Every citizen shall have the right to have access to information in all matters of public importance subject to regulation and reasonable restrictions imposed by law.
Subject to law, public order and morality,-
No person shall be compelled to pay any special tax the proceeds of which are to be spent on the propagation or maintenance of any religion other than his own.
Every citizen shall have the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property in any part of Pakistan, subject to the Constitution and any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the public interest.
The State shall provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age of five to sixteen years in such manner as may be determined by law.
Provided that, for a period not exceeding forty years from the commencing day, posts may be reserved for persons belonging to any class or area to secure their adequate representation in the service of Pakistan:
Provided further that, in the interest of the said service, specified posts or services may be reserved for members of either sex if such posts or services entail the performance of duties and functions which cannot be adequately performed by members of the other sex:
Provided also that under-representation of any class or area in the service of Pakistan may be redressed in such manner as may be determined by an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
Subject to Article 251 any section of citizens having a distinct language, script or culture shall have the right to preserve and promote the same and subject to law, establish institutions for that purpose.
The State shall encourage local Government institutions composed of elected representatives of the areas concerned and in such institutions special representation will be given to peasants, workers and women.
The State shall discourage parochial, racial, tribal sectarian and provincial prejudices among the citizens.
Steps shall be taken to ensure full participation of women in all spheres of national life.
The State shall protect the marriage, the family, the mother and the child.
The State shall safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of minorities, including their due representation in the Federal and Provincial services.
The State shall-
The State shall-
The State shall enable people from all parts of Pakistan to participate in the Armed Forces of Pakistan.
The State shall endeavour to preserve and strengthen fraternal relations among Muslim countries based on Islamic unity, support the common interests of the peoples of Asia, Africa and Latin America, promote international peace and security, foster goodwill and friendly relations among all nations and encourage the settlement of international disputes by peaceful means.
Provided that, if the election cannot be held within the period aforesaid because the National Assembly is dissolved, it shall be held within thirty days of the general election to the Assembly.
Provided that, if the election cannot be held within the period aforesaid because the National Assembly is dissolved, it shall be held within thirty days of the general election to the Assembly.
Before entering upon office, the President shall make before the Chief Justice of Pakistan oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Provided that the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his terms, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
The President shall have power to grant pardon, reprieve and respite, and to remit, suspend or commute any sentence passed by any court, tribunal or other authority.
The Prime Minister shall keep the President informed on all matters of internal and foreign policy and on all legislative proposals the Federal Government intends to bring before Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
Provided that within fifteen days the President may require the Cabinet or, as the case may be, the Prime Minister to reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall, within ten days, act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.
There shall be a Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) of Pakistan consisting of the President and two Houses to be known respectively as the National Assembly and the Senate.
Khyber Pkhtunkhwa: General Seats 45, Women Seats 10, Total Seats 55
Punjab: General Seats 141, Women Seats 32, Total Seats 173
Sindh: General Seats 61, Women Seats 14, Total Seats 75
Federal Capital: General Seats 3, Women Seats -, Total Seats 3
Total: General Seats 266, Women Seats 60, Total Seats 326
Provided that for purposes of the next general elections to be held in 2018 and bye-elections related thereto, the allocation shall be made on the basis of provisional results of the 2017 census which shall be published by the Federal Government.
Provided that for the purpose of this paragraph the total number of general seats won by a political party shall include the independent returned candidate or candidates who may duly join such political party within three days of the publication in the official Gazette of the names of the returned candidates; and
Provided that for the purpose of this paragraph the total number of general seats won by a political party shall include the independent returned candidate or candidates who may duly join such political party within three days of the publication in the official Gazette of the names of the returned candidates.
The National Assembly shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for a term of five years from the day of its first meeting and shall stand dissolved at the expiration of its term.
Provided that the National Assembly shall meet for not less than one hundred and thirty working days in each year.
Explanation.- In this clause, "working days" includes any day on which there is a joint sitting and any period, not exceeding two days, for which the National Assembly is adjourned.
The Prime Minister, a Federal Minister, a Minister of State and the Attorney General shall have the right to speak and otherwise take part in the proceedings of either House, or a joint sitting or any committee thereof, of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this Article be entitled to vote.
Explanation.- Reference in this Article to "Prime Minister" shall not be construed to include reference to a Prime Minister against whom a notice of a resolution for a vote of no-confidence has been given in the National Assembly but has not been voted upon or against whom such a resolution has been passed or who is continuing in office after his resignation or after the dissolution of the National Assembly.
Provided that paragraph (f) shall be effective from the next Senate election after the commencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010.
Provided that the Election Commission for the first term of seats for non-Muslims shall draw a lot as to which two members shall retire after the first three years.
The provisions of clauses (2) to (7) of Article 53, clauses (2) and (3) of Article 54 and Article 55 shall apply to the Senate as they apply to the National Assembly and, in their application to the Senate, shall have effect as if references therein to the National Assembly, Speaker and Deputy Speaker were references, respectively, to the Senate Chairman and Deputy Chairman and as if, in the proviso to the said clause (2) of Article 54, for the words one hundred and thirty the words one hundred and ten were substituted.
Provided that the disqualification under this paragraph shall not apply to a person-
Explanation.-In this Article "goods" does not include agricultural produce or commodity grown or produced by him or such goods as he is, under any directive of Government or any law for the time being in force, under a duty or obligation to supply; or
Explanation.- For the purposes of this paragraph "law" shall not include an Ordinance promulgated under Article 89 or Article 128.
he may be declared in writing by the Party Head to have defected from the political party, and the Party Head may forward a copy of the declaration to the Presiding Officer and the Chief Election Commissioner and shall similarly forward a copy thereof to the member concerned:
Provided that before making the declaration, the Party Head shall provide such member with an opportunity to show cause as to why such declaration may not be made against him.
Explanation.- "Party Head" means any person, by whatever name called, declared as such by the Party.
Provided that till Article 63A substituted as aforesaid comes into effect the provisions of existing Article 63A shall remain operative.
A person elected to a House shall not sit or vote until he has made before the House oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Provided that any such law-
No discussion shall take place in Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.
[Mediation Committee omitted by the Constitution (Eighteenth Amdt.) Act, 2010 (10 of 2010), s. 24 as amended by various enactments.]
Provided that simultaneously when a Money Bill, including the Finance Bill containing the Annual Budget Statement, is presented in the National Assembly, a copy thereof shall be transmitted to the Senate which may, within fourteen days, make recommendations thereon to the National Assembly.
A Money Bill, or a Bill or amendment which if enacted and brought into operation would involve expenditure from the Federal Consolidated Fund or withdrawal from the Public Account of the Federation or affect the coinage or currency of Pakistan or the constitution or functions of the State Bank of Pakistan shall not be introduced or moved in Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) except by or with the consent of the Federal Government.
No tax shall be levied for the purposes of the Federation except by or under the authority of Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
shall be credited to the Public Account of the Federation.
The custody of the Federal Consolidated Fund, the payment of moneys into that Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of other moneys received by or on behalf of the Federal Government, their payment into, and withdrawal from, the Public Account of the Federation, and all matters connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid shall be regulated by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or, until provision in that behalf is so made, by rules made by the President.
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged upon the Federal Consolidated Fund:-
Provided that, for a period of ten years from the commencing day or the holding of the second general election to the National Assembly, whichever occurs later, a demand shall be deemed to have been assented to without any reduction of the amount specified therein, unless, by the votes of a majority of the total membership of the Assembly, it is refused or assented to subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.
If in respect of any financial year it is found-
the Federal Government shall have power to authorize expenditure from the Federal Consolidated Fund, whether the expenditure is charged by the Constitution upon that Fund or not, and shall cause to be laid before the National Assembly Supplementary Budget Statement or, as the case may be, an Excess Budget Statement, setting out the amount of that expenditure, and the provisions of Articles 80 to 83 shall apply to those statements as they apply to the Annual Budget Statement.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions relating to financial matters, the National Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year, not exceeding four months, pending completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 82 for the voting of such grant and the authentication of the schedule of authorized expenditure in accordance with the provisions of Article 83 in relation to the expenditure.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions relating to financial matters, at any time when the National Assembly stands dissolved, the Federal Government may authorize expenditure from the Federal Consolidated Fund in respect of the estimated expenditure for a period not exceeding four months in any financial year, pending completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 82 for the voting of grants and the authentication of the schedule of authorized expenditure in accordance with the provisions of Article 83 in relation to the expenditure.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses.
Provided that the National Assembly may by a resolution extend the Ordinance for a further period of one hundred and twenty days and it shall stand repealed at the expiration of the extended period, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Assembly, upon the passing of that resolution:
Provided further that extension for further period may be made only once.
Provided that either House may by a resolution extend it for a further period of one hundred and twenty days and it shall stand repealed at the expiration of the extended period, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by a House, upon the passing of that resolution:
Provided further that extension for a further period may be made only once; and
Provided that, if no member secures such majority in the first poll, a second poll shall be held between the members who secure the two highest numbers of votes in the first poll and the member who secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting shall be declared to have been elected as Prime Minister:
Provided further that, if the number of votes secured by two or more members securing the highest number of votes is equal, further poll shall be held between them until one of them secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting.
Provided that there shall be no restriction on the number of terms for the office of the Prime Minister.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to a Minister who is member of the Senate.
Provided that the number of Federal Ministers and Ministers of State who are members of the Senate shall not at any time exceed one-fourth of the number of Federal Ministers:
Provided further that the total strength of the Cabinet, including Ministers of State, shall not exceed eleven percent of the total membership of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament):
Provided also that the aforesaid amendment shall be effective from the next general election held after the commencement of the Constitution Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010.
The President may ask the Prime Minister to continue to hold office until his successor enters upon the office of Prime Minister.
[Omitted by substitution through renumbering vide P. 0. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.]
Subject to the Constitution, the executive authority of the federation shall extend to the matters with respect to which Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) has power to make laws, including exercise of rights, authority and jurisdiction in and in relation to areas outside Pakistan:
Provided that the said authority shall not, save as expressly provided in the Constitution or in any law made by Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), extend in any Province to a matter with respect to which the Provincial Assembly has also power to make laws.
On the recommendation of the Federal Government, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) may by law confer functions upon officers or authorities subordinate to the Federal Government.
Before entering upon office, the Governor shall make before the Chief Justice of the High Court oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
When the Governor, by reason of absence from Pakistan or for any other cause, is unable to perform his functions, the Speaker of the Provincial Assembly and in his absence any other person as the President may nominate shall perform the functions of Governor until the Governor returns to Pakistan or, as the case may be, resumes his functions.
Provided that within fifteen days the Governor may require the Cabinet or, as the case may be, the Chief Minister to reconsider such advice, whether generally or otherwise, and the Governor shall, within ten days, act in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.
Provided that elections to the aforesaid seats shall be held within one year after the general elections, 2018.
Provided that for the purpose of this sub-clause, the total number of general seats won by a political party shall include the independent returned candidate or candidates who may duly join such political party within three days of the publication in the official Gazette of the names of the returned candidates.
A Provincial Assembly shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for a term of five years from the day of its first meeting and shall stand dissolved at the expiration of its term.
After a general election, a Provincial Assembly shall, at its first meeting and to the exclusion of any other business, elect from amongst its members a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the Assembly shall elect another member as Speaker or, as the case may be, Deputy Speaker.
The Governor may from time to time-
The Governor may address the Provincial Assembly and may for that purpose require the attendance of the members.
The Advocate-General shall have the right to speak and otherwise take part in the proceedings of the Provincial Assembly or any committee thereof of which he may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this Article be entitled to vote.
Explanation.- Reference in this Article to 'Chief Minister' shall not be construed to include reference to a Chief Minister against whom a notice of a resolution for a vote of no-confidence has been given in the Provincial Assembly but has not been voted upon or against whom a resolution for a vote of no-confidence has been passed.
The qualifications and disqualifications for membership of the National Assembly set out in Articles 62 and 63 shall also apply for membership of a Provincial Assembly as if reference therein to "National Assembly" were a reference to "Provincial Assembly".
No discussion shall take place in a Provincial Assembly with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.
shall be credited to the Public Account of the Province.
The custody of the Provincial Consolidated Fund, the payment of moneys into that Fund, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of other moneys received by or on behalf of the Provincial Government, their payment into, and withdrawal from, the Public Account of the Province, and all matters connected with or ancillary to the matters aforesaid, shall be regulated by Act of the Provincial Assembly or, until provision in that behalf is so made, by rules made by the Governor.
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.
The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged upon the Provincial Consolidated Fund:-
If in respect of any financial year it is found-
the Provincial Government shall have power to authorize expenditure from the Provincial Consolidated Fund, whether the expenditure is charged by the Constitution upon that Fund or not, and shall cause to be laid before the Provincial Assembly a Supplementary Budget Statement or, as the case may be, an Excess Budget Statement, setting out the amount of that expenditure, and the provisions of Articles 120 to 123 shall apply to those statements as they apply to the Annual Budget Statement.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions relating to financial matters, the Provincial Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial year, not exceeding three months, pending completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 122 for the voting of such grant and the authentication of the schedule of expenditure in accordance with the provisions of Article 123 in relation to the expenditure.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions relating to financial matters, at any time when the Provincial Assembly stands dissolved, the Provincial Government may authorize expenditure from the Provincial Consolidated Fund in respect of the estimated expenditure for a period not exceeding four months in any financial year, pending completion of the procedure prescribed in Article 122 for the voting of grants and the authentication of the schedule of authorized expenditure, in accordance with the provisions of Article 123 in relation to the expenditure.
Subject to the Constitution, the provisions of clauses (2) to (8) of Article 53, clauses (2) and (3) of Article 54, Article 55, Articles 63 to 67, Article 69, Article 77, Article 87 and Article 88 shall apply to and in relation to a Provincial Assembly or a committee or members thereof or the Provincial Government but so that-
Provided that the Provincial Assembly may by a resolution extend the Ordinance for a further period of ninety days and it shall stand repealed at the expiration of the extended period, or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Assembly, upon the passing of that resolution:
Provided further that extension for a further period may be made only once.
Provided that, if no member secures such majority in the first poll, a second poll shall be held between the members who secures the two highest numbers of votes in the first poll and the member who secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting shall be declared to have been elected as Chief Minister:
Provided further that, if the number of votes secured by two or more members securing the highest number of votes is equal, further polls shall be held between them until one of them secures a majority of votes of the members present and voting.
Provided that there shall be no restriction on the number of terms for the office of the Chief Minister.
Provided that the aforesaid limit shall be effective from the next general elections after the commencement of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010.
The Chief Minister shall keep the Governor informed on matters relating to Provincial administration and on all legislative proposals the Provincial Government intends to bring before the Provincial Assembly.
The Governor may ask the Chief Minister to continue to hold office until his successor enters upon the office of Chief Minister.
[Omitted by P.O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.]
[Omitted by P. O. No. 14 of 1985, Art. 2 and Sch.]
Subject to the Constitution, the executive authority of the Province shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Provincial Assembly has power to make laws:
Provided that, in any matter with respect to which both Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and the Provincial Assembly of a Province have power to make laws, the executive authority of the Province shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive authority expressly conferred by the Constitution or by law made by Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) upon the Federal Government or authorities thereof.
On the recommendation of the Provincial Government, the Provincial Assembly may by law confer functions upon officers or authorities subordinate to the Provincial Government.
Subject to the Constitution, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) may make laws (including laws having extra-territorial operation) for the whole or any part of Pakistan, and a Provincial Assembly may make laws for the Province or any part thereof.
Subject to the Constitution-
If any provision of an Act of a Provincial Assembly is repugnant to any provision of an Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) which Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) is competent to enact, then the Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), whether passed before or after the Act of the Provincial Assembly, shall prevail and the Act of the Provincial Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the Government of a Province may, with the consent of the Federal Government, entrust, either conditionally or unconditionally, to the Federal Government, or to its officers, functions in relation to any matter to which the executive authority of the Province extends:
Provided that the Provincial Government shall get the functions so entrusted ratified by the Provincial Assembly within sixty days.
Full faith and credit shall be given throughout Pakistan to public acts and records, and judicial proceedings of every Province.
The Federation may, if it deems necessary to acquire any land situate in a Province for any purpose connected with a matter with respect to which Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) has power to make laws, require the Province to acquire the land on behalf, and at the expense, of the Federation or, if the land belongs to the Province, to transfer it to the Federation on such terms as may be agreed or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief Justice of Pakistan.
[Omitted by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amdt.) Act 2003 (3 of 2003), s. 5, which was previously ins. by C.E's. 0. No. 24 of 2002, Art. 3 and Sch., as amended by various enactments.]
Provided that the Prime Minister may convene a meeting on the request of a Province on an urgent matter.
the Federal Government or the Provincial Government concerned may make a complaint in writing to the Council.
Provided that the Federal Government, prior to taking a decision to construct or cause to be constructed, hydro-electric power stations in any Province, shall consult the Provincial Government concerned.
The Province in which a well-head of natural gas is situated shall have precedence over other parts of Pakistan in meeting the requirements from that well-head, subject to the commitments and obligations as on the commencing day.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as requiring the Federal Government to entrust to any Provincial Government any control over the use of transmitters constructed or maintained by the Federal Government or by persons authorised by the Federal Government, or over the use of receiving apparatus by person so authorised.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause "net profits" shall be computed by deducting from the revenues accruing from the bulk supply of power from the bus-bars of a hydro-electric station at a rate to be determined by the Council of Common Interests, the operating expenses of the station, which shall include any sums payable as taxes, duties, interest or return on investment, and depreciations and element of obsolescence, and over-heads, and provision for reserves.
No Bill or amendment which imposes or varies a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof is assigned to any Province, or which varies the meaning of the expression "agricultural income" as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to income-tax, or which affects the principles on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or may be distributable to Provinces, shall be introduced or moved in the National Assembly except with the previous sanction of the President.
A Provincial Assembly may by Act impose taxes, not exceeding such limits as may from time to time be fixed by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), on persons engaged in professions, trades, callings or employments, and no such Act of the Assembly shall be regarded as imposing a tax on income.
The Federation or a Province may make grants for any purpose, notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or, as the case may be, a Provincial Assembly may make laws.
The executive authority of the Federation extends to borrowing upon the security of the Federal Consolidated Fund within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament), and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed.
The Auditor-General shall, in relation to-
perform such functions and exercise such powers as may be determined by or under Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and, until so determined, by Order of the President.
The reports of the Auditor-General relating to the accounts of the Federation shall be submitted to the President, who shall cause them to be laid before the both Houses of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and the reports of the Auditor-General relating to the accounts of a Province shall be submitted to the Governor of the Province, who shall cause them to be laid before the Provincial Assembly.
The Federation may sue or be sued by the name of Pakistan and a Province may sue or be sued by the name of the Province.
Explanation.- The word "High Court" wherever occurring in the Constitution shall include the High Court for the Islamabad Capital Territory.
Provided that the provisions of this Article shall have no application to the trial of persons under any of the Acts mentioned at Serial No. 6 and 7 of sub-part III of Part I of the First Schedule, who claim, or are known, to belong to any terrorist group or organization using the name of religion or a sect.
Explanation:- In this proviso, the expression "sect" means a sect of religion and does not include any religious or political party regulated under the Political Parties Order, 2002.
Provided that for appointment of the Chief Justice of a High Court, the most senior Judge mentioned in paragraph (ii) shall not be member of the Commission:
Provided further that if for any reason the Chief Justice of High Court is not available, he shall be substituted by a former Chief Justice or former Judge of that Court, to be nominated by the Chief Justice of Pakistan in consultation with the four member Judges of the Commission mentioned in paragraph (ii) of clause (2).
Provided that for initial appointment of the Chief Justice and the Judges of the Islamabad High Court, the Chief Justices of the four Provincial High Courts shall also be members of the Commission:
Provided further that subject to the foregoing proviso, in case of appointment of Chief Justice of Islamabad High Court, the provisos to clause (5) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Provided that for appointment of Chief Justice of Federal Shariat Court, the provisos, to clause (5) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Provided that when the National Assembly is dissolved, the total membership of the Parliamentary Committee shall consist of the members from the Senate only mentioned in paragraph (i) and the provisions of this Article shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Provided that the Committee, for reasons to be recorded, may not confirm the nomination by three-fourth majority of its total membership within the said period:
Provided further that if a nomination is not confirmed by the Committee it shall forward its decision with reasons so recorded to the Commission through the Prime Minister:
Provided further that if a nomination is not confirmed, the Commission shall send another nomination.
The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Justice to be known as the Chief Justice of Pakistan and so many other Judges as may be determined by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or, until so determined, as may be fixed by the President.
Before entering upon office, the Chief Justice of Pakistan shall make before the President, and any other Judge of the Supreme Court shall make before the Chief Justice, oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
A Judge of the Supreme Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years, unless he sooner resigns or is removed from office in accordance with the Constitution.
At any time when-
the President shall appoint the most senior of the other Judges of the Supreme Court to act as Chief Justice of Pakistan.
the President may, in the manner provided in clause (1) of Article 177, appoint a Judge of a High Court who is qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court to act temporarily as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Explanation.-In this clause, 'Judge of a High Court' includes a person who has retired as a Judge of a High Court.
If at any time it is not possible for want of quorum of Judges of the Supreme Court to hold or continue any sitting of the Court, or for any other reason it is necessary to increase temporarily the number of Judges of the Supreme Court, the Chief Justice of Pakistan, in Consultation with the Judicial Commission as provided in clause (2) of Article 175A, may, in writing,-
to attend sittings of the Supreme Court as an ad hoc Judge for such period as may be necessary and while so attending an ad hoc Judge shall have the same power and jurisdiction as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Explanation.-In this clause, "Governments" means the Federal Government and the Provincial Governments.
The Supreme Court may, if it considers it expedient to do so in the interest of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings pending before any High Court to any other High Court.
The Supreme Court shall have power, subject to the provisions of any Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) and of any rules made by the Supreme Court, to review any judgment pronounced or any order made by it.
Any decision of the Supreme Court shall, to the extent that it decides a question of law or is based upon or enunciates a principle of law, be binding on all other courts in Pakistan.
All executive and judicial authorities throughout Pakistan shall act in aid of the Supreme Court.
Subject to the Constitution and law, the Supreme Court may make rules regulating the practice and procedure of the Court.
Explanation.-In computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a High Court or held judicial office, there shall be included any period during which he has held judicial office after he became an advocate or, as the case may be, the period during which he has been an advocate after having held judicial office.
Before entering upon office, the Chief Justice of a High Court shall make before the Governor, and any other Judge of the Court shall make before the Chief Justice, oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule:
Provided that the Chief Justice of the Islamabad High Court shall make oath before the President and other Judges of that Court shall make oath before the Chief Justice of the Islamabad High Court.
A Judge of a High Court shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-two years, unless he sooner resigns or is removed from office in accordance with the Constitution.
At any time when-
the President shall appoint one of the other Judges of the High Court, or may request one of the Judges of the Supreme Court, to act as Chief Justice.
At any time when-
the Court shall not make an interim order unless the prescribed law officer has been given notice of the application and he or any person authorised by him in that behalf has had an opportunity of being heard and the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that the interim order-
Provided that the matter shall be finally decided by the High Court within six months from the date on which the interim order is made.
"prescribed law officer" means-
Explanation.-In this Article, "Judge" does not include a Chief Justice but includes a Judge for the time being acting as Chief Justice of a High Court other than a Judge of the Supreme Court acting as such in pursuance of a request made under paragraph (b) of Article 196.
Provided that a Judge shall not be so required except with his consent and the approval of the President and after consultation with the Chief Justice of Pakistan and the Chief Justice of the High Court of which he is a Judge.
Explanation.- In this Article, "High Court" includes a Bench of a High Court.
Subject to Article 189, any decision of a High Court shall, to the extent that it decides a question of law or is based upon or enunciates a principle of law, be binding on all courts subordinate to it.
Subject to the Constitution and law, a High Court may make rules regulating the practice and procedure of the Court or of any court subordinate to it.
Each High Court shall supervise and control all courts subordinate to it.
The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution.
In this Chapter, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-
Provided that a Judge of a High Court shall not be appointed to be a Judge except with his consent and, except where the Judge is himself the Chief Justice, after consultation by the President with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
Provided that where a Judge is already drawing a pension for any other post in the service of Pakistan, the amount of such pension shall be deducted from the pension admissible under this clause.
[Omitted by the Constitution (Second Amdt.) Order, 1981 (P.O. No. 7 of 1981), Art. 3, which was previously ins. by P.O. No. 5 of 1981, Art. 2.]
and specify the day on which the decision shall take effect:
Provided that no such decision shall be deemed to take effect before the expiration of the period within which an appeal therefrom may be preferred to the Supreme Court or, where an appeal has been so preferred, before the disposal of such appeal.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall be deemed to authorise the Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one of conviction and no order under this Article shall be made to the prejudice of the accused unless he has had an opportunity of being heard in his own defence.
Provided that an appeal on behalf of the Federation or of a Province may be preferred within six months of such decision.
Save as provided in Article 203F, no court or tribunal, including the Supreme Court and a High Court, shall entertain any proceedings or exercise any power or jurisdiction in respect of any matter within the power or jurisdiction of the Court.
Subject to Articles 203D and 203F, any decision of the Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this Chapter shall be binding on a High Court and on all courts subordinate to a High Court.
[Omitted by the Constitution (Second Amdt.) Order, 1982, (P.O. No. 5 of 1982), Art. 8.]
The remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of a Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court shall be as provided in the Fifth Schedule.
The Supreme Court and the Federal Shariat Court, with the approval of the President and a High Court, with the approval of the Governor concerned, may make rules providing for the appointment by the Court of officers and servants of the Court and for their terms and conditions of employment.
Explanation.-For the purpose of this clause, the inter se seniority of the Chief Justices of the High Courts shall be determined with reference to their dates of appointment as Chief Justice otherwise than as acting Chief Justice, and in case the dates of such appointment are the same, with reference to their dates of appointment as Judges of any of the High Courts.
shall act as a member of the Council in his place.
the President shall direct the Council to, or the Council may, on its own motion, inquire into the matter.
The proceedings before the Council, its report to the President and the removal of a Judge under clause (6) of Article 209 shall not be called in question in any court.
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to an Administrative Court or Tribunal established under an Act of a Provincial Assembly unless, at the request of that Assembly made in the form of a resolution, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) by law extends the provisions to such a Court or Tribunal.
[Omitted by S.R.O. No. 1278 (1) 85, dated 30-12-85, read with proclamation of withdrawal of Martial Law dated 30-12-85 see Gaz. of P. 1985, Ext., Pt. 1, dated 3 0-12-85, pp. 431-432, which was previously added by P.O. No. 21 of 1979, Art. 2.]
[Repealed by the Constitution (Twelfth Amdt.) Act, 1991 (14 of 1991), s. 1 (3), (w.e.f 26th July, 1994), which was previously added by Act 14 of 1991 s. 2, (w.e.f 27th July, 1991).]
Explanation 1.-“senior civil servant” means civil servant who has served for at least twenty years under Federal or a Provincial Government and has retired in BPS-22 or above.
Explanation 2.-“technocrat” means a person who is the holder of a degree requiring conclusion of at least sixteen years of education, recognized by the Higher Education Commission and has at least twenty years of experience, including a record of achievements at the national or international level.
Provided that in case there is no consensus between the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, each shall forward separate lists to the Parliamentary Committee for consideration which may confirm any one name.
Provided that the total strength of the Parliamentary Committee shall be twelve members out of which one-third shall be from the Senate:
Provided further that when the National Assembly is dissolved and a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chief Election Commissioner, total membership of the Parliamentary Committee shall consist of the members from the Senate only and the foregoing provisions of this clause shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Before entering upon office, the Commissioner shall make before the Chief Justice of Pakistan and a member of the Election Commission shall make before the Commissioner oath in the form set-out in the Third Schedule.
Provided that two of the members shall retire after the expiration of first two and a half years and two shall retire after the expiration of the next two and a half years:
Provided further that the Commission shall for the first term of office of members draw a lot as to which two members shall retire after the first two and a half years:
Provided also that the term of office of a member appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall be the un-expired term of office of the member whose vacancy he has filled.
At any time when-
the most senior member in age of the members of Commission shall act as Commissioner.
Explanation.-“senior civil servant"’ and technocrat" shall have the same meaning as given in clause (2) o f Article 213.
The Commission shall be charged with the duty of-
Provided that till such time as the members of the Commission are first appointed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (b) of clause (2) of Article 218 pursuant to the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, and enter upon their office, the Commissioner shall remain charged with the duties enumerated in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this Article.
It shall be the duty of all executive authorities in the Federation and in the Provinces to assist the Commissioner and the Election Commission in the discharge of his or their functions.
Until Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) by law otherwise provides, the Election Commission may, with the approval of the President, make rules providing for the appointment by the Commissioner of officers and staff to be employed in connection with the functions of the Election Commission and for their terms and conditions of employment.
Subject to the Constitution, Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) may by law provide for-
but no such law shall have the effect of taking away or abridging any of the powers of the Commissioner or the Election Commission under this Part.
Explanation.-In this clause, "body" means either House or a Provincial Assembly.
Provided that the care-taker Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in the outgoing National Assembly, and a care-taker Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor in consultation with the Chief Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in the outgoing Provincial Assembly:
Provided further that if the Prime Minister or a Chief Minister and their respective Leader of the Opposition do not agree on any person to be appointed as a care-taker Prime Minister or the care-taker Chief Minister, as the case may be, the provisions of Article 224A shall be followed:
Provided also that the Members of the Federal and Provincial care-taker Cabinets shall be appointed on the advice of the care-taker Prime Minister or the care-taker Chief Minister, as the case may be.
Explanation.- In this clause, "immediate family members" means spouse and children.
Provided that if at any time the party list is exhausted, the concerned political party may submit a name for any vacancy which may occur thereafter.
Provided that in case of inability of the Committee to decide the matter in the aforesaid period, the names of the nominees shall be referred to the Election Commission of Pakistan for final decision within two days.
No election to a House or a Provincial Assembly shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such tribunal and in such manner as may be determined by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
All elections under the Constitution, other than those of the Prime Minister and the Chief Minister, shall be by secret ballot.
Explanation.- In the application of this clause to the personal law of any Muslim sect, the expression "Quran and Sunnah shall mean the Quran and Sunnah as interpreted by the sect.
The President or the Governor of a Province may, or if two-fifths of its total membership so requires, a House or a Provincial Assembly shall, refer to the Islamic Council for advice on any question as to whether a proposed law is or is not repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam.
Provided that, where a law is referred for advice to the Islamic Council and the Council advises that the law is repugnant to the Injunctions of Islam, the House or, as the case may be, the Provincial Assembly, the President or the Governor shall reconsider the law so made.
The proceedings of the Islamic Council shall be regulated by rules of procedure to be made by the Council with approval of the President.
Provided that for imposition of emergency due to internal disturbances beyond the powers of a Provincial Government to control, a resolution from the Provincial Assembly of that Province shall be required:
Provided further that if the President acts on his own, the Proclamation of Emergency shall be placed before both Houses of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) for approval by each House within ten days.
Provided that nothing in paragraph (c) shall authorise the Federal Government to assume to itself, or direct the Governor of the Province to assume on its behalf, any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, or to suspend either in whole or in part the operation of any provisions of the Constitution relating to High Courts.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall authorise the President to assume to himself, or direct the Governor of the Province to assume on his behalf, any of the powers vested in, or exercisable by, a High Court, or to suspend either in whole or in part the operation of any provisions of the Constitution relating to High Courts.
Nothing in the Constitution shall prevent Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) from making any law indemnifying any person in the service of the Federal Government or a Provincial Government, or any other person, in respect of any act done in connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area in Pakistan.
Subject to this Part, the Constitution may be amended by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
Subject to the Constitution, the appointments to and the conditions of service of persons in the service of Pakistan shall be determined-
Explanation.-In this Article, "All-Pakistan Service" means a service common to the Federation and the Provinces, which was in existence immediately before the commencing day or which may be created by Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament).
Until the appropriate Legislature makes a law under Article 240, all rules and orders in force immediately before the commencing day shall, so far as consistent with the provisions of the Constitution, continue in force and may be amended from time to time by the Federal Government or, as the case may be the Provincial Government.
and shall also determine their salaries and allowances.
Every member of the Armed Forces shall make oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Provided that this clause shall not be deemed to affect the jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of any proceeding pending immediately before the day on which the Armed Forces start acting in aid of civil power.
In the Constitution,-
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as restricting the right of any person to bring appropriate proceedings against the Federation or a Province.
shall not be varied to his disadvantage during his term of office.
When any act or thing is required by the Constitution to be done within a particular period and it is not done within that period, the doing of the act or thing shall not be invalid or other-wise ineffective by reason only that it was not done within that period.
No private organisation capable of functioning as a military organisation shall be formed, and any such organisation shall be illegal.
When the people of the State of Jammu and Kashmir decide to accede to Pakistan, the relationship between Pakistan and that State shall be determined in accordance with the wishes of the people of that State.
Subject to the Constitution, until Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) by law otherwise provides, the President may, by Order, make provision for peace and good government of any part of Pakistan not forming part of a Province.
"Act of Provincial Assembly" means an Act passed by the Provincial Assembly of a Province and assented to, or deemed to have been assented to, by the Governor;
"agricultural income" means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of the law relating to income-tax;
"Article" means Article of the Constitution;
"borrow" includes the raising of money by the grant of annuities, and "loans" shall be construed accordingly;
"Chairman" means the Chairman of the Senate and, except in Article 49, includes a person acting as Chairman of the Senate;
"Chief Justice", in relation to the Supreme Court or a High Court, includes the Judge for the time being acting as Chief Justice of the Court;
"citizen" means a citizen of Pakistan as defined by law; clause means clause of the Article in which it occurs;
"clause" means clause of the Article in which it occurs;
"corporation tax" means any tax on income that is payable by companies and in respect of which the following conditions apply:-
"debt" includes any liability in respect of any obligation to repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any guarantee, and "debt charges" shall be construed accordingly;
"estate duty" means a duty assessed on, or by reference to, the value of property passing upon death;
"existing law" has the same meaning as in clause (7) of Article 268;
"Federal law" means a law made by or under the authority of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament);
"financial year" means a year commencing on the first day of July;
"goods" includes all materials, commodities and articles;
"Governor" means the Governor of a Province and includes any person for the time being acting as the Governor of a Province;
"guarantee" includes any obligation undertaken before the commencing day to make payments in the event of the profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount;
"House" means the Senate or the National Assembly;
"Joint sitting" means a joint sitting of the two Houses;
"Judge" in relation to the Supreme Court or a High Court, includes the Chief Justice of the Court and also includes-
"members of the Armed Forces" does not include persons who are not, for the time being, subject to any law relating to the members of the Armed Forces;
"net proceeds" means, in relation to any tax or duty, the proceeds thereof, reduced by the cost of collection, as ascertained and certified by the Auditor-General;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"Part" means Part of the Constitution;
"pension" means a pension, whether contributory or not, of any kind whatsoever payable to, or in respect of, any person and includes retired pay so payable, a gratuity so payable, and any sum or sums so payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any addition thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;
"person" includes any body politic or corporate;
"President" means the President of Pakistan and includes a person for the time being acting as, or performing the functions of, the President of Pakistan and, as respects anything required to be done under the Constitution before the commencing day, the President under the Interim Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan;
"Property" includes any right, title or interest in property, movable or immovable, and any means and instruments of production;
"Provincial law" means a law made by or under the authority of the Provincial Assembly;
"remuneration" includes salary and pension;
"Schedule" means Schedule to the Constitution;
"security of Pakistan" includes the safety, welfare, stability and integrity of Pakistan and of each part of Pakistan, but shall not include public safety as such;
"service of Pakistan" means any service, post or office in connection with the affairs of the Federation or of a Province, and includes an All-Pakistan Service, service in the Armed Forces and any other service declared to be a service of Pakistan by or under Act of Majlis-e-Shoora (Parliament) or of a Provincial Assembly, but does not include service as Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Chairman, Deputy Chairman, Prime Minister, Federal Minister, Minister of State, Chief Minister, Provincial Minister, Attorney-General, Advocate-General, Parliamentary Secretary or Chairman or member of a Law Commission, Chairman or member of the Council of Islamic Ideology, Special Assistant to the Prime Minister, Adviser to the Prime Minister, Special Assistant to a Chief Minister, Adviser to a Chief Minister or member of a House or a Provincial Assembly;
"Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly or a Provincial Assembly, and includes any person acting as the Speaker of the Assembly;
"taxation" includes the imposition of any tax or duty, whether general, local or special, and "tax" shall be construed accordingly;
"tax on income" includes a tax in the nature of an excess profits tax or a business profits tax.
For the purposes of the Constitution, a person who acts in an office shall not be regarded as the successor to the person who held that office before him or as the predecessor to the person who holds that office after him.
For the purposes of the Constitution, periods of time shall be reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar.
In the Constitution,
Where a law is repealed, or is deemed to have been repealed, by, under, or by virtue of the Constitution, the repeal shall not, except as otherwise provided in the Constitution,-
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the law had not been repealed.
come into force upon the enactment of the Constitution, but the person elected as President or Prime Minister shall not enter upon his office before the commencing day.
The Interim Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, together with the Acts and President's Orders making omissions from, additions to, modifications of, or amendments in, that Constitution is hereby repealed.
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Constitution (Eighteenth Amendment) Act, 2010, hereinafter in this Article referred to as the Act, or for bringing the provisions of the Act into effective operation, the matter shall be laid before both Houses in a joint sitting which may by a resolution direct that the provisions of the Act shall, during such period as may be specified in the resolution, have effect, subject to such adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as may be deemed necessary or expedient:
Provided that this power shall be available for a period of one year from the commencement of the Act.
For removal of doubt it is hereby declared that Article 152A omitted and Articles 179 and 195 substituted by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 2003 (Act No. III of 2003), notwithstanding its repeal, shall be deemed always to have been so omitted and substituted.
Explanation.-In this Article, "in force", in relation to any law, means having effect as law whether or not the law has been brought into operation.
Provided that a President's Order, Martial Law Regulation or Martial Law Order made after the thirtieth day of September, 1985, shall be confined only to making such provisions as facilitate, or are incidental to, the revocation of the Proclamation of the fifth day of July, 1977.
Explanation.-In this clause, "competent authority" means,-
Explanation.- For the purposes of clause (2) and clause (6), "competent authority" means,-
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the elections held under the Houses of (Parliament) and Provincial Assemblies (Elections) Order, 1977, and the Conduct of General Elections Order, 2002 (Chief Executive's Order No. 7 of 2002), to the Houses and the Provincial Assemblies shall be deemed to have been held under the Constitution and shall have effect accordingly.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, or any other law for the time being in force, the General Elections 2008, to the National Assembly and the Provincial Assemblies held on the eighteenth day of February, two thousand and eight shall be deemed to have been held under the Constitution and shall have effect accordingly.
and, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue until the fourteenth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-seven; and reference to 'total membership' of National Assembly in the Constitution shall be construed accordingly;
Provided that no person holding an office of profit in the service of Pakistan shall continue to be a member of the first National Assembly after the expiration of three months from the commencing day.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, but subject to Article 63 and Article 223,-
and, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue until the fourteenth day of August, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-seven; and reference "total membership" of the Assembly of a Province in the Constitution shall be construed accordingly;
Provided that no person holding an office of profit in the service of Pakistan shall continue to be a member of the Assembly after the expiration of three months from the commencing day.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, the first President may, in the absence of the Chief Justice of Pakistan, make the oath referred to in Article 42 before the Speaker of the National Assembly.
The Auditor-General shall perform the same functions and exercise the same powers in relation to accounts which have not been completed or audited before the commencing day as, by virtue of the Constitution, he is empowered to perform or exercise in relation to other accounts, and Article 171 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply accordingly.
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Constitution, all taxes and fees levied under any law in force immediately before the commencing day shall continue to be levied until they are varied or abolished by Act of the appropriate Legislature.
The Proclamation of Emergency issued on the twenty-third day of November, one thousand nine hundred and seventy-one, shall be deemed to be a Proclamation of Emergency issued under Article 232, and for the purposes of clause (7) and clause (8) thereof to have been issued on the commencing day, and any law, rule or order made or purporting to have been made in pursuance of that Proclamation shall be deemed to have been validly made and shall not be called in question in any Court on the ground of inconsistency with any of the rights conferred by Chapter I of Part II.
In the name of Allah, the most beneficent, the most merciful.
Whereas sovereignty over the entire universe belongs to Allah Almighty alone and the authority which He has delegated to the State of Pakistan, through its people for being exercised within the limits prescribed by Him is a sacred trust;
This Constituent Assembly representing the people of Pakistan resolves to frame a constitution for the sovereign independent State of Pakistan;
Wherein the State shall exercise its powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people;
Wherein the principles of democracy, freedom, equality, tolerance and social justice as enunciated by Islam shall be fully observed;
Wherein the Muslims shall be enabled to order their lives in the individual and collective spheres in accordance with the teachings and requirements of Islam as set-out in the Holy Quran and the Sunnah;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made for the minorities to freely profess and practise their religions and develop their cultures;
Wherein the territories now included in or in accession with Pakistan and such other territories as may hereafter be included in or accede to Pakistan shall form a Federation wherein the units will be autonomous with such boundaries and limitations on their powers and authority as may be prescribed;
Wherein shall be guaranteed fundamental rights including equality of status, of opportunity and before law, social, economic and political justice, and freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship and association, subject to law and public morality;
Wherein adequate provision shall be made to safeguard the legitimate interests of minorities and backward and depressed classes;
Wherein the independence of the Judiciary shall be fully secured;
Wherein the integrity of the territories of the Federation, its independence and all its rights including its sovereign rights on land, sea and air shall be safeguarded;
So that the people of Pakistan may prosper and attain their rightful and honoured place amongst the nations of the World and make their full contribution towards international peace and progress and happiness of humanity.
The Land Reforms (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975 (XXI of 1975), and the Federal Act enacted to replace the said Ordinance.
The Land Reforms (Pat Feeder Canal) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1976.
The Censorship of Films Act, 1963 (XVIII of 1963).
Provided that no person shall subscribe, whether as proposer or as seconder, more than one nomination paper at any one election.
Provided that no further nomination shall be necessary in the case of a candidate whose nomination was valid at the time of the countermanding of the poll:
Provided further that no person who has under paragraph 6 of this Schedule given notice of withdrawal of his candidature before the countermanding of the poll shall be ineligible for being nominated as a candidate for the election after such countermanding.
Explanation.-In this paragraph, "total number of seats" includes seats reserved for non-Muslims and women.
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I am a Muslim and believe in the Unity and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran being the last of them, the Prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him) as the last of the Prophets and that there can be no Prophet after him, the Day of Judgement, and all the requirements and teachings of the Holy Quran and Sunnah.
That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as President of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan;
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will:
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as President of Pakistan, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as President.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I am a Muslim and believe in the Unity and Oneness of Almighty Allah, the Books of Allah, the Holy Quran being the last of them, the Prophethood of Muhammad (peace be upon him) as the last of the Prophets and that there can be no Prophet after him, the Day of Judgement, and all the requirements and teachings of the Holy Quran and Sunnah.
That I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Prime Minister of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will:
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Prime Minister, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Prime Minister.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Federal Minister (or Minister of State); I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will:
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Federal Minister (or Minister of State), except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Federal Minister (or Minister of State), or as may be specially permitted by the Prime Minister.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Speaker of the National Assembly (or Chairman of the Senate) and whenever I am called upon to act as President of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan the law and as Speaker of the National Assembly in accordance with the rules of the Assembly (or as Chairman of the Senate in accordance with the rules of the Senate), and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, whenever I am called upon to act as Speaker of the National Assembly (or Chairman of the Senate), I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the law and the rules of the Assembly (or Senate), and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as a member of the National Assembly (or Senate), I will perform my functions honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and the law, and the rules of the Assembly (or Senate), and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan.
And that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as the Governor of the Province of , I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and the law and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will:
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Governor of the Province of ..... except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Governor.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as a Chief Minister (or Minister) of the Government of the Province of ..... , I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and the law and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
That, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will:
And that I will not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to me as Chief Minister (or Minister) except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties as Chief Minister (or Minister or as may be specially permitted by the Chief Minister).
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Speaker of the Provincial Assembly of the Province of ..... and whenever I am called upon to act as Governor, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the law and the rules of the Assembly, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, whenever I am called upon to act as Speaker of the Provincial Assembly of the Province of ..... , I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the law and the rules of the Assembly, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as a member of the Provincial Assembly of ..... I will perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, the law and the rules of the Assembly, and always in the interest of the sovereignty, integrity, solidarity, well-being and prosperity of Pakistan:
That I will strive to preserve the Islamic Ideology which is the basis for the creation of Pakistan:
And that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Auditor-General of Pakistan, I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan, and the law and to the best of my knowledge, ability and judgement, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, and that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as Chief Justice of Pakistan (or a Judge of the Supreme Court of Pakistan or Chief Justice or a Judge of the High Court for the Province or Provinces of .................................. ), I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, and faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law:
That I will abide by the code of conduct issued by the Supreme Judicial Council:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan:
That, as the Chief Justice of the Federal Shariat Court (or a Judge of the Federal Shariat Court), I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, and faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law:
That I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions:
That I will abide by the code of conduct issued by the Supreme Judicial Council:
That I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan:
And that, in all circumstances, I will do right to all manner of people, according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that as Chief Election Commissioner or, as the case may be, member of the Election Commission of Pakistan I will discharge my duties, and perform my functions, honestly, to the best of my ability, faithfully, in accordance with the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and the law, and without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, and that I will not allow my personal interest to influence my official conduct or my official decisions.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
In the name of Allah, the most Beneficent, the most Merciful.
I, , do solemnly swear that I will bear true faith and allegiance to Pakistan and uphold the Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan which embodies the will of the people, that I will not engage myself in any political activities whatsoever and that I will honestly and faithfully serve Pakistan in the Pakistan Army (or Navy or Air Force) as required by and under the law.
May Allah Almighty help and guide me (A'meen).
Provided that the President may, from time to time, raise the minimum or maximum amount of pension so specified:
Judge: Other Judge, Minimum Amount: Rs. 6,250, Maximum Amount: Rs. 7,125
Provided that the President may, from time to time, raise the minimum or maximum amount of pension so specified:
Judge: Other Judge, Minimum Amount: Rs. 5,040, Maximum Amount: Rs. 6,300
