WE, THE PEOPLE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA-
pay homage to the memory of our ancestors the source of our strength and origin of our combined heritage
acknowledge the worthy customs and traditional wisdoms of our people which have come down to us from generation to generation
pledge ourselves to guard and pass on to those who come after us our noble traditions and the Christian principles that are ours now.
By authority of our inherent right as ancient, free and independent peoples
WE, THE PEOPLE, do now establish this sovereign nation and declare ourselves, under the guiding hand of God, to be the Independent State of Papua New Guinea.
AND WE ASSERT, by virtue of that authority
that respect for the dignity of the individual and community interdependence are basic principles of our society
that we guard with our lives our national identity, integrity and self respect
that we reject violence and seek consensus as a means of solving our common problems
that our national wealth, won by honest, hard work be equitably shared by all.
WE DO NOW THEREFORE DECLARE
that we, having resolved to enact a Constitution for the Independent State of Papua New Guinea
AND ACTING through our Constituent Assembly on 15 August 1975,
HEREBY ESTABLISH, ADOPT and GIVE TO OURSELVES this Constitution to come into effect on Independence Day, that is 16 September 1975
IN SO DOING WE, THE PEOPLE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA, SET BEFORE OURSELVES THESE NATIONAL GOALS AND DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES THAT UNDERLIE OUR CONSTITUTION:
National Goals and Directive Principles.
WE HEREBY PROCLAIM the following aims as our National Goals, and direct all persons and bodies, corporate and unincorporate, to be guided by these our declared Directives in pursuing and achieving our aims:-
We declare our first goal to be for every person to be dynamically involved in the process of freeing himself from every form of domination or oppression so that each man or woman will have the opportunity to develop as a whole person in relationship with others.
WE ACCORDINGLY CALL FOR-
We declare our second goal to be for all citizens to have an equal opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, the development of our country.
WE ACCORDINGLY CALL FOR-
We declare our third goal to be for Papua New Guinea to be politically and economically independent, and our economy basically self-reliant.
WE ACCORDINGLY CALL FOR-
We declare our fourth goal to be for Papua New Guinea's natural resources and environment to be conserved and used for the collective benefit of us all and be replenished for the benefit of future generations.
WE ACCORDINGLY CALL FOR-
We declare our fifth goal to be to achieve development primarily through the use of Papua New Guinean forms of social, political and economic organizations.
WE ACCORDINGLY CALL FOR-
WE HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGE that, subject to any restrictions imposed by law on noncitizens, all persons in our country are entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, the right, whatever their race, tribe, places of origin, political opinion, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the legitimate public interest, to each of the following:-
and have accordingly included in this Constitution provisions designed to afford protection to those rights and freedoms, subject to such limitations on that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations primarily designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the acknowledged rights and freedoms by an individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the legitimate public interest.
WE HEREBY DECLARE that all persons in our country have the following basic obligations to themselves and their descendants, to each other, and to the Nation:-
IN ADDITION, WE HEREBY DECLARE that all citizens have an obligation to themselves and their descendants, to each other and to the Nation to use profits from economic activities in the advancement of our country and our people, and that the law may impose a similar obligation on non-citizens carrying on economic activities in or from our country.
Where a law requires a Declaration of Loyalty to be made, it shall be made in the following form:
"I...realizing fully the responsibilities to which I am committing myself and the consequences of not living up to this Declaration and those responsibilities, freely and willingly declare my loyalty to the Independent State of Papua New Guinea and its People and to the Constitution of Papua New Guinea adopted by the Constituent Assembly on 15 August 1975, as altered from time to time in accordance with its provisions, and promise that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws of Papua New Guinea."
Where a law requires an Oath of Allegiance or Affirmation of Allegiance to be made, it shall be made in the following form:
"Oath of Allegiance.
I‚ ... do swear that I will well and truly serve and bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Her heirs and successors according to law.
SO HELP ME GOD!
Affirmation of Allegiance.
I, ... do promise and affirm that I will well and truly serve Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II. Her heirs and successors according to law."
For the purpose of the interpretation of this Constitution and the Organic Laws, the provisions of Schedule 1 (Rules for Shortening and Interpretation of the Constitutional Laws) applies and, subject to that Schedule, the underlying law applies.
The laws of Papua New Guinea consist of-
and none other.
All written laws (other than this Constitution) shall be read and construed subject to-
and so as not to exceed the authority to make them properly given, to the intent that where any such law would, but for this section, have been in excess of the authority so given it shall nevertheless be a valid law to the extent to which it is not in excess of that authority.
but any such provision may be altered by the same majority that is required for any other Act of the Parliament.
This Constitution may be altered only by law made by the Parliament that-
and the proposed law must be published by the Speaker in full in the National Gazette, and circulated, in accordance with the Standing Orders of the Parliament, to all members of the Parliament not less than one month before it is formally introduced into the Parliament.
and is, in the absence of proof to the contrary, conclusive evidence of the matter so stated.
and such a law may be made in the same way as Acts of the Parliament.
The provisions of this Constitution that recognize rights of individuals (including corporations and associations) as well as those that confer powers or impose duties on public authorities, shall not be left without effect because of the lack of supporting, machinery or procedural laws, but the lack shall, as far as practicable, be supplied by the National Court in the light of the National Goals and Directive Principles, and by way of analogy from other laws, general principles of justice and generally-accepted doctrine.
or both, for a breach of the prohibition, restriction or duty, and may make such further order in the circumstances as it thinks proper.
is guilty of misconduct in office.
means the Head of State; and
it may give such a directive that is necessary or convenient for attaining the objects of this Division, to that person.
Where another authority is prescribed under Section 28 (further provisions) that authority-
for a period of three years after the date of his dismissal.
and no person-
Nothing in this Division derogates the rights and freedoms of the individual under any other law and, in particular, an Organic Law or an Act of the Parliament may provide further guarantees of rights and freedoms and may further restrict the limitations that may be placed on, or on the exercise of, any right or freedom (including the limitations that may be imposed under Section 38 (general qualifications on qualified rights)).
Subject to this Constitution, each provision of this Division applies, as far as may be-
except where, or to the extent that, the contrary intention appears in this Constitution.
to the extent that the law is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society having a proper respect for the rights and dignity of mankind.
Nothing in this Part invalidates an emergency law as defined in Part X (emergency powers), but nevertheless so far as is consistent with their purposes and terms all such laws shall be interpreted and applied so as not to affect or derogate a right or freedom referred to in this Division to an extent that is more than is reasonably necessary to deal with the emergency concerned and matters arising out of it, but only so far as is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society having a proper regard for the rights and dignity of mankind.
is an unlawful act.
*[this section was ruled invalid and therefore of no force or effect by the Supreme Court — SCA. NO. 84 OF 2013]
and shall be informed immediately on his arrest or detention of his rights under this subsection.
shall, unless he is released, be brought without delay before a court or a judicial officer and, in a case referred to in paragraph (b), shall not be further held in custody in connection with the offence except by order of a court or judicial officer.
No person shall be subjected to the search of his person or property or to entry of his premises, except to the extent that the exercise of that right is regulated or restricted by a law-
and generally for enabling and encouraging freedom of expression.
Every person has the right peacefully to assemble and associate and to form or belong to, or not to belong to, political parties, industrial organizations or other associations, except to the extent that the exercise of that right is regulated or restricted by a law-
has the right, and shall be given a reasonable opportunity-
that is so declared and so described, for the purposes of this section, in an Organic Law or an Act of the Parliament; and
of any right or interest in property.
in accordance with a law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society that has a proper regard for the rights and dignity of mankind; or
Nothing in Section 37 (protection of the law) or 53 (protection from unjust deprivation of property) invalidates a law that is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society that has a proper regard for human rights and that provides-
have an interest in the protection and enforcement of the rights and freedoms referred to in this Division, but this subsection does not limit the persons or classes of persons who have such an interest.
or against both, in which last case the court may apportion the damages between them.
but the burden of proof of the belief referred to in paragraph (b) is on the party alleging it.
In the development of the rules of the underlying law in accordance with Sch. 2 (adoption, etc., of certain laws) particular attention shall be given to the development of a system of principles of natural justice and of administrative law specifically designed for Papua New Guinea, taking special account of the National Goals and Directive Principles and of the Basic Social Obligations, and also of typically Papua New Guinean procedures and forms of organization.
For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that nothing in the preceding provisions of this Division derogates any of the rights and freedoms provided for by Division 3 (basic rights).
an act to which Subsection (1) applies is, to the extent to which it is done in the deliberate judgement of the person concerned, non-justiciable.
that if these were known or existed at the time approval was granted, approval would not have been granted.
has no real foreign citizenship.
not forming on Independence Day part of the area of Papua New Guinea.
unless that person renounces his right to residence in Australia or his status as a citizen of Australia or of another country in accordance with Subsection (5).
the period may not be extended beyond a further two months.
is a citizen.
is a citizen.
and, who does not fall under Subsection (2), may apply to the Minister responsible for citizenship matters to be a citizen by descent, and the Minister may, if he is satisfied as to the matters referred to in Subsection (5), in his deliberate judgement (but subject to Division 4 (citizenship advisory committee)) grant or refuse the application.
may apply to the Minister responsible for citizenship matiers to be naturalised as a citizen, and the Minister may, if he is satisfied as to the matter provided in an Act of Parliament referred to in Snbsection (6), in his deliberate judgement (but subject to Division 4 (citizenship advisory committee)) grant or refuse the application.
whichever first occurs.
loses his citizenship.
whichever first happens; or
The preceding provisions of this Division do not apply to any act done under compulsion of law of another country.
and the marriage has permanently broken up, the reference in Subsection (1)(a) to a period of five years shall be read as a reference to a period of three years commencing-
the Minister responsible for citizenship matters may, by order, deprive the child of his citizenship.
For the purposes of this Part-
Subject to any Act of the Parliament, a requirement in this Part of a period of residence in a place is not satisfied by-
The provisions of this Constitution referring to the Queen extend to Her Majesty's heirs and successors in the sovereignty of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The Head of State takes precedence in rank over all other persons in Papua New Guinea and the Governor-General takes precedence in rank immediately after the Head of State.
The Style and Titles of the Head of State are as determined by Act of the Parliament, and until such an Act is made are-
Elizabeth II, Queen of Papua New Guinea and Her other Realms and Territories, Head of the Commonwealth.
the Speaker shall not call a meeting of the Parliament in accordance with Subsection (3) or (4), as the case may be, and a nomination shall be made at the first meeting of the new Parliament as its first item of business after any formal business and the election of a Speaker.
Notwithstanding Section 90 (Declaration of Loyalty, etc.,) for the purposes of this Constitution a person appointed as Governor-General takes office-
Unless he earlier dies, resigns, ceases to be qualified for office in accordance with Section 87 (qualifications for appointment), is dismissed under Section 90 (Declaration of Loyalty, etc.,), or 93(1) (dismissal and removal from office), or is removed from office under Section 93(2) (dismissal and removal from office), the Governor-General holds office for a term of six years from the date of his assumption of office in accordance with Section 89 (assumption of office), plus any period that is required, in accordance with Section 88(5) (appointment to office), for the appointment of the next Governor-General.
and pending any resultant action by the Parliament.
the Speaker is, subject to Subsection (3), the Acting Governor-General.
Where any act is done, decision is made or advice is given by the Parliament or the National Executive Council under this Part, the Prime Minister shall immediately convey it to the Head of State.
Unless the contrary intention appears, any act by the Head of State takes effect when it is formally advised to the Prime Minister or the National Executive Council.
The Parliament may, from time to time, by a two-thirds absolute majority vote, appoint a person (other than a member) to be a nominated member of the Parliament.
"statutory period allowed for appeals" means a definite period allowed by law for appeals, whether or not it is capable of extension, but does not include an extension of such a definite period granted or that may be granted unless it is granted within that definite period.
If the office of an elected member of the Parliament becomes vacant otherwise than by virtue of Section 104(2)(b) (normal term of office), an election shall be held to fill the vacancy unless the vacancy occurs-
in accordance with Section Sch.1.18 (disallowance, etc.,) and the Standing Orders of the Parliament.
whether embodied in a single instrument or in two or more related instruments and whatever may be its designation, but does not include a visiting forces agreement entered into in accordance with Section 206 (visiting forces);
"treaty document" means-
and in accordance with this section.
Nothing in this Subdivision prevents the Parliament from establishing Sessional or Select Committees or other committees for any purpose, or prevents the Parliament from sitting as a Committee of the Whole.
The business of the Parliament shall be so arranged as to allow reasonable time for committees of the Parliament to perform their functions adequately, and the Standing Orders of the Parliament shall make provision to ensure that such time is allowed either within or outside the sitting hours of the Parliament.
Each committee of the Parliament shall consist only of members of the Parliament, but nothing in this section prevents the establishment, by statute or otherwise, of commissions or committees of any other kind.
The purpose of this Subdivision are-
is guilty of misconduct in office; and
and an Organic Law may make provision, in addition to the provisions expressly referred to in this Subdivision, for achieving those purposes.
In this Subdivision, "registered political party" means a political party or organization registered under an Organic Law made for the purpose of Section 129(1)(a) (integrity of political parties).
"personal expenses", in relation to a candidate, means any reasonable costs incurred by him personally for travel and for living away from his home for the purposes of the election.
An Organic Law made for the purposes of this Subdivision may-
is guilty of misconduct in office; and
The Parliament may make Standing Orders and other rules and orders in respect of the order and conduct of its business and proceedings and the business and proceedings of its committees, and of such other matters as by law are required or permitted to be prescribed or provided for by the Standing Orders of the Parliament.
Except as is specifically provided by a Constitutional Law, the question, whether the procedures prescribed for the Parliament or its committees have been complied with, is non-justiciable, and a certificate by the Speaker under Section 110 (certification as to making of laws) is conclusive as to the matters required to be set out in it.
The National Court has jurisdiction to determine any question as to
Where a person who has purported to sit or vote as a member of the Parliament at a meeting of the Parliament or of a committee of the Parliament-
the Parliament may make a special law (to be known as an "Act of Indemnity") in relation to that person or those persons.
but in respect only of acts done before the Parliament was formally advised of the intention to propose the Act.
Subject to this Constitution, the executive power of the people is vested in the Head of State, to be exercised in accordance with Division V.2 (functions, etc., of the Head of State).
The National Executive consists of-
Except where the contrary intention appears, nothing in this Constitution prevents an Organic Law or a statute from conferring or imposing powers, functions, duties or responsibilities on a person or authority outside the National Executive.
The Ministry is a Parliamentary Executive, and therefore-
a Minister (including the Prime Minister) holds office until the next appointment of a Prime Minister.
shall continue in office until the appointment of the next Prime Minister.
shall continue in office until the next appointment of a Prime Minister.
and may remit or refund, in whole or in part, any fine, penalty or forfeiture paid or payable to a governmental body.
The National Justice Administration consists of-
except where-
Except to the extent that this Constitution specifically provides otherwise, neither the Minister responsible for the National Justice Administration nor any other person or authority (other than the Parliament through legislation) outside the National Judicial System has any power to give directions to any court, or to a member of any court, within that System in respect of the exercise of judicial powers or functions. Subdivision B
and otherwise as provided by this Constitution or any other law.
The National Court shall consist of-
and otherwise as provided by this Constitution or any other law.
Subject to this section, an Act of the Parliament may make provision for and in respect of the appointment of Assistant Judges of the National Court, and for and in respect of their qualifications, privileges, powers, functions, duties and responsibilities, and of their terms and conditions of employment.
The qualifications for appointment as a Judge are as determined by or under an Act of the Parliament.
the powers, functions, duties and responsibilities (other than as acting Governor-General) of the Chief Justice may be exercised and performed by the next most senior Judge who is available.
A Judge, the Public Prosecutor, the Public Solicitor or the Chief Magistrate may, during his term of office, be removed from office only-
may suspend the person concerned from office pending the report of the tribunal, and may remove the suspension at any time.
If in the circumstances of a particular case before a court no provision, or no adequate provision, is made in respect of a matter of practice or procedure, the court shall give ad hoc directions to remedy the lack or inadequacy.
Nothing in this Division prevents the establishment, by or under an Act of the Parliament, of a system of juries or assessors.
There shall be a system of Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments for Papua New Guinea in accordance with this Part.
An Organic Law shall provide for, or make provision in respect of, the form and the manner of establishment of the Provincial Governments and the Local-level Governments.
and may make other financial provisions for Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments, to an extent reasonably adequate for the performance of their functions.
are validated, to the extent that the provisions of the Act or Acts were in contravention of this Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 6.
and all questions as to such consistency are justiciable.
the period of nine months referred to in Subsection (1) runs from the end of the meeting (or if there are more such extensions than one the last meeting) of the Parliament at which the declaration is so extended.
Nothing in any law is inconsistent with this Part so far as it provides for the full status, powers or functions of Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments to be acquired by a Provincial Government and a Local-level Government in stages, or provides for a gradation of Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments or provides for Interim Provincial Governments.
The Minister responsible for provincial government and local-level government matters shall, at least once in each period of 12 months, at such times as are fixed—
present to the Head of State, for presentation to the Parliament, a report on the working of the system of Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments.”.
All of the State Services other than the Defence Force shall be civilian services, and all of the State Services shall be subject at all times to ultimate civilian control.
The Public Services Commission is not subject to direction or control when carrying out its functions under Section 191(1)(a) (functions of the Constitution).
other than the offices of the members of the Public Services Commission.
In this Division "personnel matters" means decisions and other service matters concerning an individual whether in relation to his appointment, promotion, demotion, transfer, suspension, disciplining or cessation or termination of employment (except cessation or termination at the end of his normal period of employment as determined in accordance with law), or otherwise.
Subject to this Part, Acts of the Parliament may make provision for or in respect of the State Services, and in particular for and in respect of-
There shall be, within the Police Force, an office of Commissioner of Police, who shall be responsible for the superintendence, efficient organization and control of the Force in accordance with an Act of the Parliament.
There shall be only one Police Force in Papua New Guinea, but this section does not prevent-
by or under an Act of the Parliament.
in accordance with an Act of the Parliament.
and each of whom shall have such other powers, functions, duties and responsibilities as are prescribed by or under an Act of the Parliament.
The functions of the Defence Force are-
either within the country or outside it, in accordance with this Constitution and Acts of the Parliament.
Since it is necessary that the Defence Force and the members of the Defence Force have no special position under the law except to such extent as is required by the nature of the Force as a disciplined force and its peculiar functions, duties and responsibilities, it is hereby declared that, except as is specifically provided by a Constitutional Law or an Act of the Parliament, the Defence Force and the members of the Defence Force are subject to all laws in the same way as other bodies and persons.
outside the country without the prior approval of the Parliament.
and in particular for or in respect of-
and declared by an Act of Parliament to be a body to which this Part applies.
There shall be a Public Accounts Committee, which is a Permanent Parliamentary Committee for the purposes of Subdivision VI.2.E (the Committee system).
The purposes of the establishment of the Ombudsman Commission are-
or an officer of employee of any such body; and
specified by or under an Organic Law in the exercise of a power or function vested in it or him by law in cases where the conduct is or may be wrong, taking into account, amongst other things, the National Goals and Directive Principles, the Basic Rights and the Basic Social Obligations; and
whether or not the act was supposed to be done in the exercise of deliberate judgement within the meaning of Section 62 (decisions in "deliberate judgement").
where the conduct is or may be wrong; and
For the purposes of this Division, unless the contrary intention appears-
"Commission" means the Independent Commission Against Corruption established under Section 220B(1);
"corrupt conduct" means any conduct, act or omission defined in an Organic Law as a corrupt conduct;
"member" means a member of the Commission;
"Oversight Committee" means the Committee prescribed under Section 220G.
The purposes of the Commission are to contribute, in cooperation with other agencies, to preventing, reducing and combating corrupt conduct.
Subject to any Organic Law made for the purposes of Section 220E, the functions of the Commission are-
An Organic Law shall make provision for an Independent Commission Against Corruption Oversight Committee, whose role shall be to monitor, review and report on the Commission's functions, operations and exercise of powers.
In this Part-
"constitutional-office holder" means-
This Part shall be read subject to any other provisions of this Constitution relating to particular constitutional office-holders or particular constitutional institutions.
Without limiting the generality of any other provision of this Constitution, it is the duty of the National Government and of all other governmental bodies, and of all public office-holders and institutions, to ensure, as far as is within their respective legal powers, that all arrangements are made, staff and facilities provided and steps taken to enable and facilitate, as far as may reasonably be, the proper and convenient performance of the functions of all constitutional institutions and of the offices of all constitutional office-holders.
In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears-
"emergency" includes, without limiting the generality of the expression-
"Emergency Act" means an Act of the Parliament made for the purposes of this Part and in accordance with Section 230 (Emergency Act);
"Emergency Committee" means an Emergency Committee appointed under Section 240 (Emergency Committees), and includes a Temporary Emergency Committee appointed and in office under Section 241 (Temporary Emergency Committees);
"emergency law" means-
"emergency order" means an order made under an emergency law, as provided for by Section 232 (emergency orders);
"Emergency Regulation" means a law that is made in accordance with Section 231 (Emergency Regulations);
"internment" means detention that is authorized by or under a law the validity of which depends solely on this Part, but does not include the detention of a member of the armed forces of another country as a prisoner of war;
"period of declared national emergency" means any period during which-
The Head of State, acting with, and in accordance with, the advice of the National Executive Council, may publicly declare that Papua New Guinea is at war with another country.
A declaration of war or of a national emergency may be revoked at any time-
and may not provide for a sentence of imprisonment for a period exceeding nine months.
Subject to any Act of the Parliament made for the purpose of dealing with the effect of the expiry or revocation of a particular Emergency Regulation, any person held in custody under or for the purposes of an Emergency Regulation shall be released from custody on its expiry or repeal, unless he is also held in custody under some other law.
If a member of the Parliament is held in custody under an Emergency Regulation, or is an internee, he shall, at all times when the Parliament is in session or when a committee (of which he is a member) of the Parliament is meeting, be released, on such conditions (if any) as are prescribed by an Act of the Parliament, into the custody of the Parliament in order to allow him to attend to his parliamentary duties, unless he is also held in custody under some other law.
whichever first occurs.
and such other related matters as it thinks fit.
and such other matters as the Parliament thinks fit.
During a period of declared national emergency, and while any emergency law is in force, first priority shall, subject to any express provision of this Constitution to the contrary, be given to any question, notice, motion or other Parliamentary process relating to the emergency or to an emergency law.
During a period of declared national emergency the Parliament may, by an absolute majority vote, extend its term of office, or the term of office of the Governor-General, or both, for a term not exceeding the length of the period and such time afterwards as is necessary to allow a general election to be arranged and held, or for a Governor-General to be appointed, as the case requires.
All property that was, immediately before Independence Day, vested in the body corporate at that time known as "The Government of Papua New Guinea" is, on that day, vested in Papua New Guinea, and all rights and liabilities (actual or contingent) of that body immediately before that day are, on that day, rights and liabilities of Papua New Guinea.
Subject to any Organic Law, every person who is subject to Division III.2 (leadership code) before entering upon the duties of or exercising any of the powers of his office, shall make-
the Head of State, acting with, and in accordance with, the advice of the National Executive Council, may, by order, substitute some oath, affirmation or declaration or, if thought necessary, exempt the person from the requirement.
There shall be an official journal of the National Government, which shall be known as the National Gazette or by such other name as is given by or under an Act of the Parliament.
Slavery, and the slave trade in all their forms, and all similar institutions and practices, are strictly prohibited.
In principle-
In principle, where a law provides for consultation between persons or bodies, or persons and bodies, the consultation must be meaningful and allow for a genuine interchange and consideration of views.
Subject to this Constitution, an Act of the Parliament may make provision for and in respect of annual and other reports by a constitutional office-holder or any other public office-holder, or by a constitutional institution or any other statutory body.
Unless otherwise provided for by a Constitutional Law, in any case where a Constitutional Law requires the appointment of an independent tribunal, the members of the tribunal shall be appointed from a list of names approved by the Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
The provisions of this Part, and of any Provisional Organic Law or Organic Law made for the purposes of Section 267 (transitional laws), have effect notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this Constitution.
The Constituent Assembly, having performed its duty to frame and adopt, on behalf of the People, a Constitution, and its other duties, is dissolved.
If before Independence Day-
that person becomes the first Governor-General on Independence Day.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution-
on the same terms and conditions that were applicable to him before Independence Day but in no case shall his term of office exceed three years from the date of his present appointment.
in public on Independence Day, at such place, and in such manner and form, as are directed by the Prime Minister.
The provisions of Section 117 (treaties, etc.,) do not prevent the Head of State, acting with, and in accordance with, the advice of the National Executive Council, from making a declaration that an international commitment, that, immediately before Independence Day, applied to the territory at that time known as Papua New Guinea or a component part of that territory may, by agreement, be treated as if it were binding on Papua New Guinea for a period not exceeding five years after that day.
Except where expressly provided otherwise in a Constitution Law, until 16 September 1985, where a constitutional institution other than the Supreme Court or the National Court is composed of more than one person, the majority of those persons must be citizens, but failure to comply with this section does not invalidate any act of the institution.
Until 16 September 1985, in addition to persons who are qualified to be appointed as Judges of the National Court, a person who holds office as a Magistrate of the highest grade or classification is eligible for appointment as Chairman of a tribunal appointed in accordance with Section 245(1)(e) (internment).
After the establishment of the Bougainville Government following elections, in accordance with this Part and the Bougainville Constitution, the provisions of Part VIA shall not apply to Bougainville.
“Bougainville” means–
“Bougainville Constituent Assembly” means the Bougainville Constituent Assembly established in accordance with Section 284 (Bougainville Constituent Assembly);
“Bougainville Constitution” means the Bougainville Constitution endorsed and gazetted in accordance with Section 285 (Endorsement of Bougainville Constitution);
“Bougainville Constitutional Commission” means the Bougainville Constitutional Commission established in accordance with Section 281 (Bougainville Constitutional Commission);
“Bougainville Constitutional Office-holder” means a Bougainville Constitutional Office-holder appointed under or in pursuance of the provisions of Section 321 (Bougainville Constitutional Office-holders);
“Bougainville Correctional Service” means Bougainville Correctional Service for which provision is made under Section 310(1)(c) (Bougainville Government Services);
“Bougainville court” means a court established under Section 306(1) (Establishment of courts in Bougainville);
“Bougainville Executive” means the accountable executive body of the Bougainville Government;
“Bougainville Government” means the autonomous Bougainville Government established in accordance with this Part;
“Bougainville Interim Provincial Government” means the Bougainville Interim Provincial Government established under the Organic Law on Provincial Governments and Local-level Governments;
“Bougainville law” means a law made in accordance with the Bougainville Constitution and this Part;
“Bougainville Legislature” means the legislature of the Bougainville Government;
“Bougainville Police” means the Bougainville Police for which provision is made under Section 310)1)(b) (Bougainville Government Services);
“Bougainville Public Service” means the Bougainville Public Service for which provision is made under Section 310(1)(a) (Bougainville Government Services);
“Bougainville Referendum” means the Referendum for which provision is made under Division 7 (Bougainville Referendum);
“Bougainville Salaries and Remuneration Commission” means the Bougainville Salaries and Remuneration Commission established in accordance with Section 320 (Bougainville Salaries and Remuneration Commission);
“dispute resolution procedure” means the dispute resolution procedure for which provision is made under Division 6 (intergovernmental Relations and Review);
“fiscal self-reliance” means the first year in which the revenue from company tax, customs duties and 70% of value added tax collected in Bougainville is equal to the value of the recurrent grant on a sustainable basis;
“National law” means a law made by the National Parliament;
“Referendum” means the Bougainville Referendum;
“review” means a review under Division 6.
There shall be a Bougainville Constitution made and endorsed in accordance with this Part, which make provision for the organization and structures of the government for Bougainville under the autonomy arrangements in a manner consistent with this Part and with the Agreement
The Bougainville Constitutional Commission shall–
The functions and powers of government relating to Bougainville shall be divided between the National Government and the Bougainville Government in accordance with this Part and the Agreement.
in accordance with the Agreement and this Part.
shall be a power and function of the National Government, until otherwise determined in accordance with this section.
shall not be given unless –
within the period of 12 months commencing on the date of the establishment of the Bougainville Government.
Where the Bougainville Government wishes a function or power available to it to be transferred to it, it shall–
unless both Governments otherwise agree.
An Organic Law shall make provision for–
The National Government or the Bougainville Government may, by agreement, transfer or delegate any function or power (including a financial function or power) to the other Government.
The Bougainville Constitution and laws made by the Bougainville Legislature in accordance with the Bougainville Constitution form part of the laws of Papua New Guinea as specified in Section 9 (The Laws).
The–
are authorities entitled to make application to the Supreme Court, in accordance with Section 19 (Special references to the Supreme Court), for an opinion on any question relating to the interpretation or application of any provision of a Constitutional Law including (but without limiting the generality of that expression) any question as to the validity of a law or proposed law.
to the extent that the law is reasonably justifiable in a democratic society having a proper regard for the rights and dignity of mankind.
The National Judicial System shall continue to carry out its responsibilities in Bougainville, in accordance with this Part.
such jurisdiction to be limited to and in relation to Bougainville.
The Bougainville Constitution may make provision for the establishment within Bougainville by or in accordance with a Bougainville law, or by consent of the parties concerned, of arbitral or conciliatory tribunals, whether ad hoc or other, outside the National Judicial System and such tribunals shall be subject to Section 159 (tribunals, etc., outside the National Judicial System).
in accordance with this Part, and may provide for Bougainville laws to make further provision in respect of Bougainville Government Services.
compatible with those of the National Public Service; and
The National Public Service shall continue to operate in Bougainville–
consistent with those of the Police Force established by Section 188(1)(b) (Establishment of the State Services); and
consistent with those of the Correctional Service of the National Government; and
An Organic Law shall make provision for and in respect of the funding of the Bougainville Correctional Service.
The Bougainville Constitution may make provision for procedures to be followed by the Bougainville Government to deal with an emergency as defined in Section 266 (Definitions).
The basic principles of the fiscal arrangements between the National Government and the Bougainville Government are as follows: –
Subject to the Agreement, an Organic Law shall make provision for–
Subject to the Agreement, an Organic Law shall make provision in accordance with the Agreement for circumstances where any audit carried out by the Auditor-General discloses systematic and widespread abuse (or misuse) of funding provided to the Bougainville Government by way of recurrent or conditional grant and in particular shall make provision for–
in relation to any such abuse (or misuse).
In this Division unless the contrary intention appears–
“dispute resolution procedure” means the dispute resolution procedure set out in Section 333 (Joint Supervisory Body);
“inter governmental relations” means relations between the National Government and the Bougainville Government
“Joint Supervisory Body” means the Joint Supervisory Body established by Section 332 (Joint Supervisory Body);
“review” means review under Section 337 (reviews).
The general principles of intergovernmental relations between the National Government and the Bougainville Government are as follows:–
The dispute resolution procedure is as follows:–
The Courts shall have jurisdiction in a dispute–
The question or questions to be put at the Referendum–
The National Government and the Bougainville Government shall-co-operate to ensure that the Referendum is free and fair.
Any differences between the National Government and the Bougainville Government in relation to the Referendum shall be resolved in accordance with the dispute resolution procedure.
in respect of an offence –
Where this Part authorizes an Organic Law to make provision for any matter, the Organic Law may make full provision for all aspects of that matter, notwithstanding that all such aspects have not been expressly referred to in the provision authorizing the Organic Law.
An Organic Law may make provision for all matters relating to the transition of Bougainville from the system of Government immediately before the coming into operation of this Part to the system of Government for which provision is made in this Part.
"act" includes omission or failure to act;
"Act of the Parliament" means a law (other than a Constitutional Law) made by the Parliament, and includes a subordinate legislative enactment made under any such law;
"alter", in relation to any provision of this Constitution or any other law, includes repeal (with or without re-enactment or the making of other provision), amend, modify, suspend (or remove a suspension) or add to the words or effect of the provision;
"committee", in relation to the Parliament, includes a subcommittee of a committee of the Parliament;
"Constitutional Law" means this Constitution, a law altering this Constitution or an Organic Law;
"the country" means the area of Papua New Guinea;
"custom" means the customs and usages of indigenous inhabitants of the country existing in relation to the matter in question at the time when and the place in relation to which the matter arises, regardless of whether or not the custom or usage has existed from time immemorial;
"the day fixed for the return of the writs for a general election" means-
"the Declaration of Office" means a declaration in the form in Schedule 3;
"the Deputy Leader of the Opposition" means the member of the Parliament (if any) recognized by the Parliament as being the second principal speaker on behalf of those members of the Parliament who are not generally committed to support the Government in the Parliament;
"deliberate judgement", in relation to an act, has the meaning and effect attributed to it by Section 62 (decisions in "deliberate judgement");
"Emergency Regulation" means a law that is made in accordance with Section 231 (Emergency Regulations);
"fiscal year", in relation to any activity of the National Government, means the period of 12 months commencing on 1 July or on such other date as is fixed by an Act of the Parliament for the purpose;
"of full capacity", in relation to a person means that he is not of unsound mind within the meaning of any law relating to the custody or protection of the persons or property of persons of unsound mind;
"governmental body" means-
"Judge" means a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Judge of the National Court;
"Judge of the National Court" means the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice or a Judge, and includes an acting Judge;
"Judge of the Supreme Court" means a Judge of the National Court, other than an acting Judge;
"the Judicial Declaration" means a declaration in the form in Schedule 4;
"judicial officer" means a Judge or Magistrate of a court within the National Judicial System(other than a magistrate or member of a village court) in his capacity as such;
"law" includes the underlying law;
"lawyer" means a person who has been admitted to practice as a lawyer under an Act of the Parliament;
"the Leader of the Opposition" means the member of the Parliament (if any) recognized by the Parliament as being the principal speaker on behalf of those members of the Parliament who are not generally committed to support the Government in the Parliament;
"local government body" includes a local government council and a local government authority established under the pre-Independence law known as the Local Government Act 1963 or any other law;
"medical practitioner" means a person who has been admitted to practice as a medical practitioner under an Act of the Parliament;
"the Minister" in relation to any Constitutional Law, provision, matter or thing, means the Minister for the time being administering that Constitutional Law or provision, or the Minister for the time being administering the Constitutional Law or provision that governs that matter or thing, as the case may be;
"misconduct in office" means misconduct in office as described in Section 27 (responsibilities of office) or as prescribed by an Organic Law made for the purposes of Section 28 (further provisions) or as prescribed by an Organic Law made for the purposes of Subdivision VI.2.H (Protection of Elections from Outside or Hidden Influence and Strengthening of Political Parties);
"the National Gazette" includes any Special National Gazette or National Gazette Extraordinary, and any supplement to a National Gazette;
"Papua New Guinea" means the Independent State of Papua New Guinea;
"Parliamentary Leader of, a registered political party" or "Parliamentary Leader" means the member of the Parliament elected by a registered political party to be its Parliamentary Leader;
"personal staff", in relation to the Governor-General, a Minister, the Leader of the Opposition or the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, means the staff supplied to him by or under an Act of the Parliament at the public expense, not being members of the National Public Service in their capacities as such;
"pre-Independence law" has the same meaning as in Section Sch.2.6 (adoption of pre-Independence laws);
"pre-Independence Supreme Court" means the pre-Independence court known as the Supreme Court of Papua New Guinea, the Supreme Court of the Territory of Papua and New Guinea or the Supreme Court of the Territory of Papua New Guinea;
"provincial government body"
"provincial law" means a law made or adopted by a provincial legislature, and includes a subordinate legislative enactment made under any such law;
"public accounts of Papua New Guinea" includes all accounts, books and records of, or in the custody, possession or control of, the National Executive or of a public officer, relating to public property or public moneys of Papua New Guinea;
"public moneys of Papua New Guinea" includes moneys held in trust by the National Executive or a public officer in his capacity as such, whether or not they are so held for particular persons;
"principles of natural justice" means the principles referred to in Division III.4 (principles of natural justice), and where those principles have been altered in accordance with Section 60 (development of principles), or by an Act of the Parliament, includes those principles as so altered;
"public office" means-
"public office-holder" means-
"the public trustee" means the officer (by whatever title known) charged with the duty of administering deceased intestate estates;
"seat", in relation to the Parliament, includes-
"statute" means an Act of the Parliament, an Emergency Regulation or a provincial law, and includes a subordinate legislative enactment made under any such law;
"subordinate legislative enactment" means a regulation or any other instrument (whether of a legislative nature or not) made under a statute;
"taxation" includes rates, charges and fees and imposts of any kind;
"time of war" means a period during which a declaration under Section 227 (declaration of war) is in force;
"the underlying law" means-
"village court" means a court referred to in Section 172(2) (establishment of other courts).
A Constitutional Law speaks from time to time.
Where a provision of a Constitutional Law is expressed to state a proposition "in principle", then-
Where a Constitutional Law declares a question to be non-justiciable, the question may not be heard or determined by any court or tribunal, but nothing in this section limits the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman Commission or of any other tribunal established for the purposes of Division III.2 (leadership code).
In a Constitutional Law-
Where no time is prescribed or allowed within which an act is required or permitted by a Constitutional Law to be done, the act shall or may be done, as the case may be, with all convenient speed and as often as the occasion arises.
Where a Constitutional Law refers to "the appropriate Permanent Parliamentary Committee", the Parliament shall determine which Permanent Parliamentary Committee is the appropriate committee for the purpose and where the Parliament fails to do so the Speaker may so determine.
For any purpose of a Constitutional Law, a person attains a certain age at the first moment of the relevant anniversary of his birth.
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if the repealed provisions had continued in force.
to which the repealed provisions were relevant.
Where a Constitutional Law provides that a person or institution is not subject to control or direction, or otherwise refers to the independence of a person or institution, that provision does not affect-
and does not constitute an appropriation of, or authority to expend, funds.
A provision of a Constitutional Law that provides for the regulation of an act or thing does not extend to prohibition, whether in law or in effect.
For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that-
and to the circumstances of the country from time to time.
refer the matter for decision to the Supreme Court, and take whatever other action (including the adjournment of proceedings) is appropriate.
In all cases, it is the duty of the National Judicial System, and especially of the Supreme Court and the National Court, to ensure that, with due regard to the need for consistency, the underlying law develops as a coherent system in a manner that is appropriate to the circumstances of the country from time to time, except insofar as it would not be proper to do so by judicial act.
In their reports under Section 187(1) (reports by Judges), and in any report under Section 187(2) (reports by Judges) if in their opinion it is desirable to do so, the Judges shall comment on the state, suitability and development of the underlying law, with any recommendations as to improvement that they think it proper to make.
other than such a law that was repealed or superseded, or had expired or was spent, before the commencement of the Laws Repeal Act 1975; and
or the further development and adoption of those doctrines, principles and rules in accordance with Part 3 of this Schedule (development of an underlying law for Papua New Guinea).
then unless the question is trivial, vexatious or irrelevant the court may, and shall if so requested by a party to the matter, state a case to the court that made the decision or decisions or the equivalent court, or if there be no such court to the National Court, and take whatever other action (including the adjournment of proceedings) is appropriate.
subject to any decision of law of the Supreme Court or the National Court, as the case may be, to the contrary, but otherwise no decision of law of a court or tribunal that was not established within the National Judicial System is binding on a court within it.
In addition to its other functions and responsibilities under any law, it is a special responsibility of the Law Reform Commission to investigate and report to the Parliament and to the National Executive on the development, and on the adaptation to the circumstances of the country, of the underlying law, and on the appropriateness of the rules and principles of the underlying law to the circumstances of the country from time to time.
I, , do promise and declare that I will well and truly serve the Independent State of Papua New Guinea and its People in the office of
I, , do promise and declare that I will well and truly serve the Independent State of Papua New Guinea and its People in the office of , that I will in all things uphold the Constitution and the laws of the Independent State of Papua New Guinea, and I will do right to all manner of people in accordance therewith, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Act 1968Sections 9 and 14 only.
Explosives Act 1901-1973.
Judiciary Act 1903-1969--Section 84 only.
Marine Insurance Act 1909-1966.
Navigation Act 1912-1973.
Patents Act 1903-1973--Section 123 only.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967-1968--Section 11 only.
Nationality and Citizenship Act 1948-1967--Section 5(3) only.
Seamen's Compensation Act 1911-1972--Section 4 only (in relation to a ship registered in the country under the Merchant Shipping Act 1894, as amended, of England)
Seamen's War Pensions and Allowances Act 1940-1974.
Submarine Cables and Pipelines Protection Act 1963-1973.
Merchant Shipping Act 1894.
Merchant Shipping Act 1897.
Merchant Shipping (Liability of Ship owners and Others) Act 1900.
Merchant Shipping Act 1906.
Merchant Shipping Act 1911.
Maritime Conventions Act 1911.
Merchant Shipping Act 1921.
Fees (Increase) Act 1923.
“the relevant period” means the period commencing on 1 July 1999 and ending on the coming into operation of this section.
under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period is hereby validated.
under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period are hereby validated.
in relation to objections referred to in Paragraph (a) or (b), under an in accordance with the Act during the relevant period are not invalid by reason only of the fact that the Act was, during the relevant period, declared unconstitutional.
under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period are not invalid by reason only of the fact that the Act was, during the relevant period, declared unconstitutional.
“the relevant period” means the period commencing on 1 July 1999 and ending on the date of coming into operation of this section.
under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period are hereby validated.
under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period are hereby validated.
are, in respect of all actions taken by them under and in accordance with the Act during the relevant period, hereby indemnified against civil or criminal liability alleged on the grounds that the Act was, during the relevant period, declared unconstitutional.
