Having regard for the existence and future of our Homeland,
Which recovered, in 1989, the possibility of a sovereign and democratic determination of its fate,
We, the Polish Nation - all citizens of the Republic,
Both those who believe in God as the source of truth, justice, good and beauty,
As well as those not sharing such faith but respecting those universal values as arising from other sources,
Equal in rights and obligations towards the common good - Poland,
Beholden to our ancestors for their labours, their struggle for independence achieved at great sacrifice, for our culture rooted in the Christian heritage of the Nation and in universal human values,
Recalling the best traditions of the First and the Second Republic,
Obliged to bequeath to future generations all that is valuable from our over one thousand years' heritage,
Bound in community with our compatriots dispersed throughout the world,
Aware of the need for cooperation with all countries for the good of the Human Family,
Mindful of the bitter experiences of the times when fundamental freedoms and human rights were violated in our Homeland,
Desiring to guarantee the rights of the citizens for all time, and to ensure diligence and efficiency in the work of public bodies,
Recognizing our responsibility before God or our own consciences,
Hereby establish this Constitution of the Republic of Poland as the basic law for the State, based on respect for freedom and justice, cooperation between the public powers, social dialogue as well as on the principle of aiding in the strengthening the powers of citizens and their communities.
We call upon all those who will apply this Constitution for the good of the Third Republic to do so paying respect to the inherent dignity of the person, his or her right to freedom, the obligation of solidarity with others, and respect for these principles as the unshakeable foundation of the Republic of Poland.
The Republic of Poland shall be the common good of all its citizens.
The Republic of Poland shall be a democratic state ruled by law and implementing the principles of social justice.
The Republic of Poland shall be a unitary State.
The Republic of Poland shall safeguard the independence and integrity of its territory and ensure the freedoms and rights of persons and citizens, the security of the citizens, safeguard the national heritage and shall ensure the protection of the natural environment pursuant to the principles of sustainable development.
The organs of public authority shall function on the basis of, and within the limits of, the law.
The Republic of Poland shall respect international law binding upon it.
The Republic of Poland shall ensure freedom for the creation and functioning of trades unions, socio-occupational organizations of farmers, societies, citizens' movements, other voluntary associations and foundations.
Political parties and other organizations whose programmes are based upon totalitarian methods and the modes of activity of nazism, fascism and communism, as well as those whose programmes or activities sanction racial or national hatred, the application of violence for the purpose of obtaining power or to influence the State policy, or provide for the secrecy of their own structure or membership, shall be forbidden.
The Republic of Poland shall ensure freedom of the press and other means of social communication.
Marriage, being a union of a man and a woman, as well as the family, motherhood and parenthood, shall be placed under the protection and care of the Republic of Poland.
The Republic of Poland shall take special care of veterans of the struggle for independence, particularly war invalids.
A social market economy, based on the freedom of economic activity, private ownership, and solidarity, dialogue and cooperation between social partners, shall be the basis of the economic system of the Republic of Poland.
Limitations upon the freedom of economic activity may be imposed only by means of statute and only for important public reasons.
The basis of the agricultural system of the State shall be the family farm. This principle shall not infringe the provisions of Articles 21 and 22.
Work shall be protected by the Republic of Poland. The State shall exercise supervision over the conditions of work.
Polish shall be the official language in the Republic of Poland. This provision shall not infringe upon national minority rights resulting from ratified international agreements.
Warsaw shall be the capital of the Republic of Poland.
The inherent and inalienable dignity of the person shall constitute a source of freedoms and rights of persons and citizens. It shall be inviolable. The respect and protection thereof shall be the obligation of public authorities.
A Polish citizen shall, during a stay abroad, have the right to protection by the Polish State.
The Republic of Poland shall ensure the legal protection of the life of every human being.
No one shall be subjected to scientific experimentation, including medical experimentation, without his voluntary consent.
No one may be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment. The application of corporal punishment shall be prohibited.
There shall be no statute of limitation regarding war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The statute of limitation regarding actions connected with offences committed by, or by order of, public officials and which have not been prosecuted for political reasons, shall be extended for the period during which such reasons existed.
Property may be forfeited only in cases specified by statute, and only by virtue of a final judgment of a court.
Everyone shall have the right to legal protection of his private and family life, of his honour and good reputation and to make decisions about his personal life.
The freedom and privacy of communication shall be ensured. Any limitations thereon may be imposed only in cases and in a manner specified by statute.
The inviolability of the home shall be ensured. Any search of a home, premises or vehicles may be made only in cases and in a manner specified by statute.
The freedom of peaceful assembly and participation in such assemblies shall be ensured to everyone. Limitations upon such freedoms may be imposed by statute.
Polish citizens enjoying full public rights shall have a right of access to the public service based on the principle of equality.
Everyone shall have the right to submit petitions, proposals and complaints in the public interest, in his own interest or in the interests of another person - with his consent - to organs of public authority, as well as to organizations and social institutions in connection with the performance of their prescribed duties within the field of public administration. The procedures for considering petitions, proposals and complaints shall be specified by statute.
Public authorities shall provide, in accordance with statute, aid to disabled persons to ensure their subsistence, adaptation to work and social communication.
The freedom of artistic creation and scientific research as well as dissemination of the fruits thereof, the freedom to teach and to enjoy the products of culture, shall be ensured to everyone.
Public authorities shall protect consumers, customers, hirers or lessees against activities threatening their health, privacy and safety, as well as against dishonest market practices. The scope of such protection shall be specified by statute.
Each party shall have the right to appeal against judgments and decisions made at first stage. Exceptions to this principle and the procedure for such appeals shall be specified by statute.
In accordance with principles specified by statute, everyone shall have the right to apply to the Commissioner for Citizens' Rights for assistance in protection of his freedoms or rights infringed by organs of public authority.
The rights specified in Article 65, paras. 4 and 5, Article 66, Article 69, Article 71 and Articles 74-76, may be asserted subject to limitations specified by statute.
Loyalty to the Republic of Poland, as well as concern for the common good, shall be the duty of every Polish citizen.
Everyone shall observe the law of the Republic of Poland.
Everyone shall comply with his responsibilities and public duties, including the payment of taxes, as specified by statute.
Everyone shall care for the quality of the environment and shall be held responsible for causing its degradation. The principles of such responsibility shall be specified by statute.
On the basis of and within limits specified by statute, organs of local self-government and territorial organs of government administration shall enact local legal enactments applicable to their territorially defined areas of operation. The principles of and procedures for enacting local legal enactments shall be specified by statute.
No one may be a Deputy and Senator at the same time.
"I do solemnly swear to perform my duties to the Nation diligently and conscientiously, to safeguard the sovereignty and interests of the State, to do all within my power for the prosperity of the Homeland and the well-being of its citizens, and to observe the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland."
The oath may also be taken with the additional sentence "So help me, God."
Conditions appropriate to the effective discharge of their duties by the Deputies as well as for defence of their rights resulting from the exercise of their mandate shall be specified by statute.
The provisions of Articles 103-107 shall apply, as appropriate, to Senators.
The internal organization and conduct of work of the Sejm and the procedure for appointment and operation of its organs as well as the manner of performance of obligations, both constitutional and statutory, by State organs in relation to the Sejm, shall be specified in the rules of procedure adopted by the Sejm.
Sittings of the Sejm shall be open to the public. The Sejm may resolve, by an absolute majority vote taken in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies, to hold a debate in secret.
The principles for deployment of the Armed Forces beyond the borders of the Republic of Poland shall be specified by a ratified international agreement or by statute. The principles for the presence of foreign troops on the territory of the Republic of Poland and the principles for their movement within that territory shall be specified by ratified agreements or statutes.
The Sejm shall pass bills by a simple majority vote, in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies, unless the Constitution provides for another majority. The same procedure shall be applied by the Sejm in adoption of resolutions, unless a statute or a resolution of the Sejm provide otherwise.
The provisions of Article 110, Article 112, Article 113 and Article 120 shall apply, as appropriate, to the Senate.
The President of the Republic shall assume office upon taking the following oath in the presence of the National Assembly:
"Assuming, by the will of the Nation, the office of President of the Republic of Poland, I do solemnly swear to be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution; I pledge that I shall steadfastly safeguard the dignity of the Nation, the independence and security of the State, and also that the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens shall forever remain my supreme obligation."
The oath may also be taken with the additional sentence "So help me, God."
The President of the Republic shall hold no other offices nor discharge any public functions, with the exception of those connected with the duties of his office.
The advisory organ to the President of the Republic regarding internal and external security of the State shall be the National Security Council.
In the event of a direct external threat to the State, the President of the Republic shall, on request of the Prime Minister, order a general or partial mobilization and deployment of the Armed Forces in defence of the Republic of Poland.
The President of the Republic shall grant Polish citizenship and shall give consent for renunciation of Polish citizenship.
The President of the Republic shall confer orders and decorations.
The President of the Republic shall have the power of pardon. The power of pardon may not be extended to individuals convicted by the Tribunal of State.
The President of the Republic may deliver a Message to the Sejm, to the Senate or to the National Assembly. Such Message shall not be a subject of debate.
The Presidential Chancellory shall be the organ of assistance to the President of the Republic. The President of the Republic shall establish the statute of the Presidential Chancellory and shall appoint and dismiss its Chief.
The Prime Minister shall:
A member of the Council of Ministers shall not perform any activity inconsistent with his public duties.
The Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers and ministers shall take the following oath in the presence of the President of the Republic:
"Assuming this office of Prime Minister (Deputy Prime Minister, minister) I do solemnly swear to be faithful to the provisions of the Constitution and other laws of the Republic of Poland, and that the good of the Homeland and the prosperity of its citizens shall forever remain my supreme obligation."
The oath may also be taken with the additional sentence "So help me, God."
The Prime Minister may submit to the Sejm a motion requiring a vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers. A vote of confidence in the Council of Ministers shall be granted by a majority of votes in the presence of at least half of the statutory number of Deputies.
The President of the Republic, on request of the Prime Minister, shall effect changes in the composition of the Council of Ministers.
Local self-government shall perform public tasks not reserved by the Constitution or statutes to the organs of other public authorities.
To the extent established by statute, units of local self-government shall have the right to set the level of local taxes and charges.
Members of a self-governing community may decide, by means of a referendum, matters concerning their community, including the dismissal of an organ of local self-government established by direct election. The principles of and procedures for conducting a local referendum shall be specified by statute.
The courts and tribunals shall constitute a separate power and shall be independent of other branches of power.
The courts and tribunals shall pronounce judgments in the name of the Republic of Poland.
The common courts shall implement the administration of justice concerning all matters save for those statutorily reserved to other courts.
Judges shall be appointed for an indefinite period by the President of the Republic on the motion of the National Council of the Judiciary.
A judge shall not, without prior consent granted by a court specified by statute, be held criminally responsible nor deprived of liberty. A judge shall be neither detained nor arrested, except for cases when he has been apprehended in the commission of an offence and in which his detention is necessary for securing the proper course of proceedings. The president of the competent local court shall be forthwith notified of any such detention and may order an immediate release of the person detained.
A statute shall specify the scope of participation by the citizenry in the administration of justice.
The Chief Administrative Court and other administrative courts shall exercise, to the extent specified by statute, control over the performance of public administration. Such control shall also extend to judgments on the conformity to statute of resolutions of organs of local self-government and normative acts of territorial organs of government administration.
The President of the Chief Administrative Court shall be appointed by the President of the Republic for a 6-year term of office from amongst candidates proposed by the General Assembly of the Judges of the Chief Administrative Court.
The Constitutional Tribunal shall adjudicate regarding the following matters:
The Constitutional Tribunal shall settle disputes over authority between central constitutional organs of the State.
The following persons may make application to the Constitutional Tribunal in respect of matters specified in Article 189: the President of the Republic, the Marshal of the Sejm, the Marshal of the Senate, the Prime Minister, the First President of the Supreme Court, the President of the Chief Administrative Court and the President of the Supreme Chamber of Control.
Any court may refer a question of law to the Constitutional Tribunal as to the conformity of a normative act to the Constitution, ratified international agreements or statute, if the answer to such question of law will determine an issue currently before such court.
A judge of the Constitutional Tribunal shall not be held criminally responsible or deprived of liberty without prior consent granted by the Constitutional Tribunal. A judge shall be neither detained nor arrested, except for cases when he has been apprehended in the commission of an offence and in which his detention is necessary for securing the proper course of proceedings. The President of the Constitutional Tribunal shall be notified forthwith of any such detention and may order an immediate release of the person detained.
The organization of the Constitutional Tribunal, as well as the mode of proceedings before it, shall be specified by statute.
A member of the Tribunal of State shall not be held criminally responsible nor deprived of liberty without prior consent granted by the Tribunal of State. A member of the Tribunal of State shall be neither detained nor arrested, except for cases when he has been apprehended in the commission of an offence and in which his detention is necessary for securing the proper course of proceedings. The chairperson of the Tribunal of State shall be notified forthwith of any such detention and may order an immediate release of the person detained.
The organization of the Tribunal of State, as well as the mode of proceedings before it, shall be specified by statute.
The President of the Supreme Chamber of Control shall not be held criminally responsible nor deprived of liberty without prior consent granted by the Sejm. The President of the Supreme Chamber of Control shall be neither detained nor arrested, except for cases when he has been apprehended in the commission of an offence and in which his detention is necessary for securing the proper course of proceedings. The Marshal of the Sejm shall be notified forthwith of such detention and may order an immediate release of the person detained.
The organization and mode of work of the Supreme Chamber of Control shall be specified by statute.
The Commissioner for Citizens' Rights shall be independent in his activities, independent of other State organs and shall be accountable only to the Sejm in accordance with principles specified by statute.
The Commissioner for Citizens' Rights shall not be held criminally responsible nor deprived of liberty without prior consent granted by the Sejm. The Commissioner for Citizens' Rights shall be neither detained nor arrested, except for cases when he has been apprehended in the commission of an offence and in which his detention is necessary for securing the proper course of proceedings. The Marshal of the Sejm shall be notified forthwith of any such detention and may order an immediate release of the person detained.
The Commissioner for Citizens' Rights shall annually inform the Sejm and the Senate about his activities and report on the degree of respect accorded to the freedoms and rights of persons and citizens.
The principles for and mode of work of the National Council of Radio Broadcasting and Television, its organization and detailed principles for appointing its members, shall be specified by statute.
The imposition of taxes, as well as other public imposts, the specification of those subject to the tax and the rates of taxation, as well as the principles for granting tax reliefs and remissions, along with categories of taxpayers exempt from taxation, shall be by means of statute.
The organization of the State Treasury and the manner of management of the assets of the State Treasury shall be specified by statute.
The right to introduce legislation concerning a Budget, an interim budget, amendments to the Budget, a statute on the contracting of public debt, as well as a statute granting financial guarantees by the State, shall belong exclusively to the Council of Ministers.
The Council of Ministers shall submit to the Sejm a draft Budget for the next year no later than 3 months before the commencement of the fiscal year. In exceptional instances, the draft may be submitted later.
The Senate may, within the 20 days following receipt of the Budget, adopt amendments thereto.
If, after 4 months from the day of submission of a draft Budget to the Sejm, it has not been adopted or presented to the President of the Republic for signature, the President of the Republic may, within the following of 14 days, order the shortening of the Sejm's term of office.
In the case of external threats to the State, acts of armed aggression against the territory of the Republic of Poland or when an obligation of common defence against aggression arises by virtue of international agreement, the President of the Republic may, on request of the Council of Ministers, declare a state of martial law in a part of or upon the whole territory of the State.
The President of the Republic shall submit the regulation on the introduction of martial law or a state of emergency to the Sejm within 48 hours of signing such regulation. The Sejm shall immediately consider the regulation of the President. The Sejm, by an absolute majority of votes taken in the presence of at least half the statutory number of Deputies, may annul the regulation of the President.
In order to prevent or remove the consequences of a natural catastrophe or a technological accident exhibiting characteristics of a natural disaster, the Council of Ministers may introduce, for a definite period no longer than 30 days, a state of natural disaster in a part of or upon the whole territory of the State. An extension of a state of natural disaster may be made with the consent of the Sejm.
Within one year of the day on which the Constitution comes into force, the Budget may allow for the covering of the budget deficit by contracting debt in the central bank of the State.
The following are hereby repealed:
The Constitution of the Republic of Poland shall come into force on the expiry of the 3­month period following the day of its promulgation.
