On the 25th of April 1974 the Armed Forces Movement crowned the long years of resistance and reflected the deepest feelings of the Portuguese people by overthrowing the fascist regime.
Freeing Portugal from dictatorship, oppression and colonialism was a revolutionary change and the beginning of an historic turning point for Portuguese society.
The Revolution restored their fundamental rights and freedoms to the people of Portugal. In the exercise of those rights and freedoms, the people's legitimate representatives have come together to draw up a Constitution that matches the country's aspirations.
The Constituent Assembly affirms the Portuguese people's decision to defend national independence, guarantee fundamental citizens' rights, establish the basic principles of democracy, ensure the primacy of a democratic state based on the rule of law and open up a path towards a socialist society, with respect for the will of the Portuguese people and with a view to the construction of a country that is freer, more just and more fraternal.
Meeting in plenary session on 2 April 1976, the Constituent Assembly does hereby pass and decree the following Constitution of the Portuguese Republic:
Portugal shall be a sovereign Republic, based on the dignity of the human person and the will of the people and committed to building a free, just and solidary society.
The Portuguese Republic shall be a democratic state based on the rule of law, the sovereignty of the people, plural democratic expression and organisation, respect for and the guarantee of the effective implementation of fundamental rights and freedoms, and the separation and interdependence of powers, all with a view to achieving economic, social and cultural democracy and deepening participatory democracy.
All persons whom the law or international convention consider to be Portuguese citizens shall be such citizens.
The fundamental tasks of the state shall be:
Portuguese citizens who find themselves or who reside abroad shall enjoy the state's protection in the exercise of such rights and shall be subject to such duties as are not incompatible with their absence from the country.
The set of rules governing rights, freedoms and guarantees shall apply to those set out in Title II and to fundamental rights of a similar nature.
Everyone shall possess the right to resist any order that infringes their rights, freedoms or guarantees and, when it is not possible to resort to the public authorities, to use force to repel any aggression.
Jointly with their officeholders, staff and agents, the state and all other public bodies shall be civilly liable for such actions or omissions in the performance of their functions as result in a breach of rights, freedoms or guarantees or in any loss to others.
Workers shall be guaranteed job security, and dismissal without fair cause or for political or ideological reasons shall be prohibited.
Society and the economy shall be organised on the basis of the following principles:
In the economic and social field the state shall be under a primary duty:
The law shall lay down the means and forms of intervention in relation to, and for the public compulsory purchase of, means of production, together with the criteria for setting the applicable compensation.
The law shall regulate economic activity and investment by foreign private individuals and bodies corporate, with the aim of ensuring that they contribute to the country's development and defending national independence and workers' interests.
The workers of units of production in the public sector shall be ensured an effective participation in the said units' management.
The objective of economic and social development plans shall be to promote economic growth, the harmonious and integrated development of sectors and regions, the just division of the national product between persons and between regions, the coordination of economic policy with the social, education and cultural policies, the defence of the rural world, the preservation of the ecological balance, the defence of the environment and the quality of life of the Portuguese people.
Without prejudice to the right of ownership and as laid down by law, the state shall promote the resizing of farming units that are smaller than that which is suitable from the point of view of the agricultural policy objectives, particularly by means of legal, fiscal and credit incentives for their structural or merely economic integration, particularly in a cooperative form, or by measures designed to join parcels of land together.
The participation of rural workers and farmers in drawing up the agricultural policy shall be ensured via the organisations that represent them.
The objectives of the commercial policy shall be:
The objectives of the industrial policy shall be:
The financial system shall be structured by law in such a way as to guarantee the accumulation, deposit and security of savings, as well as the application of the financial resources needed for economic and social development.
The Bank of Portugal shall be the national central bank and shall perform its functions as laid down by law and in accordance with the international rules by which the Portuguese state is bound.
The Budget's execution shall be scrutinised by the Audit Court and the Assembly of the Republic. Following receipt of an opinion to be issued by the Audit Court, the Assembly of the Republic shall consider the General State Accounts, including the social security accounts, and shall put them to the vote.
Political power shall lie with the people and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution.
The direct and active participation in politics by men and women is a fundamental instrument in the consolidation of the democratic system, and the law shall promote both equality in the exercise of civic and political rights and the absence of gender-based discrimination in access to political office.
The President of the Republic shall represent the Portuguese Republic, shall guarantee national independence, the unity of the state and the proper functioning of the democratic institutions, and shall be ex officio Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.
Citizens of Portuguese origin who are registered to vote and have attained the age of thirty-five shall be eligible for election.
I swear by my honour to faithfully perform the office with which I am invested and to defend and observe the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and cause it to be observed.
In relation to other bodies the President of the Republic shall be responsible for:
The President of the Republic shall be personally responsible for:
In international relations the President of the Republic shall be responsible for:
In the event that the President of the Republic fails to enact or sign any of the acts provided for in Article 134(b), the said act shall be legally invalid.
The Council of State shall be the political body that advises the President of the Republic.
The Council of State shall be chaired by the President of the Republic and shall also be composed of the following members:
The Council of State shall be responsible for:
The Council of State shall issue the opinions provided for in Article 145a to e at a meeting which the President of the Republic shall call for that purpose, and such opinions shall be made public at the time of the act to which they refer.
The Assembly of the Republic shall be the assembly that represents all Portuguese citizens.
The Assembly of the Republic shall possess a minimum of one hundred and eighty and a maximum of two hundred and thirty Members, as laid down by electoral law.
Save such restrictions as electoral law may lay down in relation to local incompatibilities or the exercise of certain offices, all Portuguese citizens who are registered to vote shall be eligible for election.
Members shall have the following powers:
Members shall enjoy the following rights and privileges:
Members shall possess the following duties:
The Assembly of the Republic shall be responsible for:
In the performance of its scrutiny functions the Assembly of the Republic shall be responsible for:
In relation to other bodies the Assembly of the Republic shall be responsible for:
The Assembly of the Republic shall possess exclusive responsibility to legislate on the following matters:
The Assembly of the Republic shall be responsible for:
The Assembly and its committees shall be assisted in their work by a permanent body of technical and administrative staff, and by specialists on assignment or under temporary contracts. The number of such staff and specialists shall be the that which the President considers necessary.
The Government shall be the body that conducts the country's general policy and the supreme authority in the Public Administration.
The Government's Programme shall set out the main political guidelines and the measures that are to be adopted or proposed in the various areas of governance.
Members of Government shall be bound by the Government's Programme and by decisions taken by the Council of Ministers.
The Government shall be responsible to the President of the Republic and the Assembly of the Republic.
The Government may ask the Assembly of the Republic to pass a motion of confidence in relation to a statement of general policy or any important matter of national interest.
In the exercise of its administrative functions the Government shall be responsible for:
The courts shall be independent and subject only to the law.
In matters that are brought to trial, the courts shall not apply rules that contravene the provisions of this Constitution or the principles enshrined therein.
Court hearings shall be public, save in the event that in order to safeguard personal dignity or public morals, or to ensure its own proper operation, the court in question rules otherwise in a written order setting out the grounds for its decision.
The law shall ensure that lawyers enjoy the immunities needed to exercise their mandates and shall regulate legal representation as an element that is essential to the administration of justice.
During states of war, courts martial with jurisdiction over crimes of a strictly military nature shall be formed.
The Constitutional Court shall be the court with specific responsibility for administering justice in matters of a legal and constitutional nature.
Within the limits laid down by this Constitution and the laws and regulations issued by a higher category of local authority, or by an authority with oversight over the local authority in question, local authorities shall possess their own regulatory power.
A parish's representative bodies shall be the parish assembly and the parish authority.
The parish authority shall be its parish's collegiate executive body.
Parishes may form associations to administer common interests, as laid down by law.
Parish assemblies may delegate administrative tasks that do not entail the exercise of powers of authority to residents' organisations.
Municipalities shall be created and abolished and their area shall be altered by means of laws, following prior consultation of the bodies of the local authorities in question.
A municipality's representative bodies shall be the municipal assembly and the municipal authority.
The municipal assembly shall be its municipality's decision-making body and shall be composed of directly elected members and the presidents of the municipality's parish authorities. The number of directly elected members shall be greater than that of the presidents of the parish authorities.
The municipal authority shall be its municipality's collegiate executive body.
In order to administer common interests, municipalities may form associations and federations, on which the law may confer specific powers and responsibilities.
The administrative regions shall be created simultaneously by means of a law, which shall define their powers and the composition, responsibilities and proceedings of their bodies and may lay down differences between the rules applicable to each administrative region.
Administrative regions shall particularly be charged with the direction of public departments and services and with tasks involving the coordination and provision of support for the work of the municipalities, while respecting the municipalities' autonomy and without imposing limits on their powers.
Administrative regions shall draw up regional plans and shall take part in the drawing up of national plans.
The regional assembly and the regional authority shall be an administrative region's representative bodies.
The regional assembly shall be its region's decision-making body. It shall be composed of directly elected members, and by a smaller number of members who shall be elected in accordance with the proportional representation system and using d'Hondt's highest-average rule, by an electoral college formed by those members of the same area's municipal assemblies who were appointed by direct election.
The regional authority shall be its region's collegiate executive body.
The Council of Ministers may appoint a Government representative to each region. The responsibilities of such representatives shall also extend to the local authorities in their area.
Strictly to the extent required by the specific demands of the functions in question, the law may impose restrictions on the exercise of the rights of expression, meeting, demonstration, association and collective petition and the right to stand for election by full-time military and militarised personnel on active service, and by members of the police forces and security services. In the case of the latter, even when their right to form trade unions is recognised, the law may preclude enjoyment of the right to strike.
Constitutional revision laws shall respect:
No act involving the revision of this Constitution shall be undertaken during a state of siege or a state of emergency.
Until such time as the law provided for in Article 239(3) comes into force, local authority bodies shall be formed and shall operate in accordance with the legislation that corresponds to the text of the Constitution as revised by Constitutional Law no. 1/92, dated 25 November 1992.
The provisions of Article 115(3) shall not prejudice the possibility of calling and holding a referendum on the approval of a treaty aimed at the construction and deepening of the European Union.
