We the people of Korea, proud of a resplendent history and traditions dating from time immemorial, upholding the cause of the Provisional Republic of Korea Government born of the March First Independence Movement of 1919 and the democratic ideals of the April Nineteenth Uprising of 1960 against injustice, having assumed the mission of democratic reform and peaceful unification of our homeland and having determined to consolidate national unity with justice, humanitarianism and brotherly love, and
To destroy all social vices and injustice, and
To afford equal opportunities to every person and provide for the fullest development of individual capabilities in all fields, including political, economic, civic and cultural life by further strengthening the free democratic basic order conducive to private initiative and public harmony, and
To help each person discharge those duties and responsibilities concomitant to freedoms and rights, and
To elevate the quality of life for all citizens and contribute to lasting world peace and the common prosperity of mankind and thereby to ensure security, liberty and happiness for ourselves and our posterity forever,
Do hereby amend, through national referendum following a resolution by the National Assembly, the Constitution, ordained and established on the Twelfth Day of July anno Domini Nineteen hundred and forty-eight, and amended eight times subsequently.
The Day of October anno Domini Nineteen hundred and eighty-seven.
The territory of the Republic of Korea shall consist of the Korean peninsula and its adjacent islands.
The Republic of Korea shall seek unification and shall formulate and carry out a policy of peaceful unification based on the free democratic basic order.
The State shall strive to sustain and develop the cultural heritage and to enhance national culture.
All citizens shall be assured of human worth and dignity and have the right to pursue happiness. It shall be the duty of the State to confirm and guarantee the fundamental and inviolable human rights of individuals.
All citizens shall enjoy freedom of residence and the right to move all will.
All citizens shall enjoy freedom of occupation.
All citizens shall be free from intrusion into their place of residence. In case of search or seizure in a residence, a warrant issued by a judge upon request of a prosecutor shall be presented.
The privacy of no citizen shall be infringed.
The privacy of correspondence of no citizen shall be infringed.
All citizens shall enjoy freedom of conscience.
All citizens shall have the right to vote as prescribed by law.
All citizens shall have the right to hold public office as prescribed by law.
In a case where a criminal suspect or an accused person who has been placed under detention is not indicated as provided by law or is acquitted by a court, he shall be entitled to claim just compensation from the State as prescribed by law.
Citizens who have suffered bodily injury or death due to criminal acts of others may receive aid from the State as prescribed by law.
All citizens shall have the duty to pay taxes as prescribed by law.
The legislative power shall be vested in the National Assembly.
The term of office of members of the National Assembly shall be four years.
Members of the National Assembly shall not concurrently hold any other office prescribed by law.
No member of the National Assembly shall be held responsible outside the National Assembly for opinions officially expressed or votes cast in the Assembly.
The National Assembly shall elect one Speaker and two Vice-Speakers.
Except as otherwise provided for in the Constitution or in law, the attendance of a majority of the total members, and the concurrent vote of a majority of the members present, shall be necessary for decisions of the National Assembly. In case of a tie vote, the matter shall be regarded as rejected.
Bills and other matters submitted to the National Assembly for deliberation shall not be abandoned on the ground that they were not acted upon during the session in which they were introduced, except in a case where the term of the members of the National Assembly has expired.
Bills may be introduced by members of the National Assembly or by the Executive.
When it is necessary to amend the budget, the Executive may formulate a supplementary revised budget bill and submit it to the National Assembly.
The National Assembly shall, without the consent of the Executive, neither increase the sum of any item of expenditure nor create any new items of expenditure in the budget submitted by the Executive.
When the Executive plans to issue national bonds or to conclude contracts which may incur financial obligations on the State outside the budget, it shall have the prior concurrence of the National Assembly.
Types and rates of taxes shall be determined by law.
The President, at the time of his inauguration, shall take the following oath: "I do solemnly swear before the people that I will faithfully execute the duties of the President by observing the Constitution, defending the State, pursuing the peaceful unification of the homeland, promoting the freedom and welfare of the people and endeavoring to develop national culture".
The term of office of the President shall be five years, and the President shall not be reelected.
If the office of the presidency is vacant or the President is unable to perform his duties for any reason, the Prime Minister or the members of the State Council in the order of priority as determined by law shall act for him.
The President may submit important policies relating to diplomacy, national defense, unification and other matters relating to the national destiny to a national referendum if he deems it necessary.
The President shall conclude and ratify treaties; accredit, receive or dispatch diplomatic envoys; and declare war and conclude peace.
The President may issue presidential decrees concerning matters delegated to him by law with the scope specifically defined and also matters necessary to enforce laws.
The President shall appoint public officials as prescribed by the Constitution and law.
The President shall award decorations and other honors as prescribed by law.
The President may attend and address the National Assembly or express his views by written message.
The acts of the President under law shall be executed in writing, and such documents shall be countersigned by the Prime Minister and the members of the State Council concerned. The same shall apply to military affairs.
The President shall not concurrently hold the office of Prime Minister, a member of the State Council, the head of any Executive Ministry, nor other public or private posts as prescribed by law.
The President shall not be charged with a criminal offense during his tenure of office except for insurrection or treason.
Matters pertaining to the status and courteous treatment of former Presidents shall be determined by law.
The following matters shall be referred to the State Council for deliberation:
Heads of Executive Ministries shall be appointed by the President from among members of the State Council on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister or the head of each Executive Ministry may, under the powers delegated by law or Presidential Decree, or ex officio, issue ordinances of the Prime Minister or the Executive Ministry concerning matters that are within their jurisdiction.
The establishment, organization and function of each Executive Ministry shall be determined by law.
A Board of Audit and Inspection shall be established under the direct jurisdiction of the President to inspect and examine the settlement of the revenues and expenditures of the State, the accounts of the State and other organizations specified by law and the job performances of the executive agencies and public officials.
The Board of Audit and Inspection shall inspect the closing of accounts of revenues and expenditures each year, and report the results to the President and the National Assembly in the following year.
The organization and function of the Board of Audit and Inspection, the qualifications of its members, the range of the public officials subject to inspection and other necessary matters shall be determined by law.
Judges shall rule independently according to their conscience and in conformity with the Constitution and law.
The Supreme Court may establish, within the scope of law, regulations pertaining to judicial proceedings and internal discipline and regulations on administrative matters of the court.
Trials and decisions of the courts shall be open to the public: provided that, when there is a danger that such trials may undermine the national security or disturb public safety and order, or be harmful to public morals, trials may be closed to the public by court decision.
The State may impose, as prescribed by law, restrictions or obligations necessary for the efficient and balanced utilization, development and preservation of the land of the nation that is the basis for the productive activities and daily lives of all citizens.
The State shall, as prescribed by law, guarantee the consumer protection movement intended to encourage sound consumption activities and improvement in the quality of products.
The state shall foster foreign trade, and may regulate and coordinate it.
Private enterprises shall not be nationalized nor transferred to ownership by a local government, nor shall their management be controlled or administered by the State, except in cases as prescribed by law to meet urgent necessities of national defense or the national economy.
Proposed amendments to the Constitution shall be put before the public by the President for twenty days or more.
This Constitution shall enter into force as of the twenty-fifth day of February, anno Domini Nineteen hundred and eighty-eight: except that, the enactment or amendment of laws necessary to implement this Constitution, the elections of the President and the National Assembly under this Constitution and other preparations to implement this Constitution may be carried out prior to the entry into force of this Constitution.
Laws, decrees, ordinances and treaties in force at the time this Constitution enters into force shall remain valid unless they are contrary to this Constitution.
Those organizations existing at the time of the enforcement of this Constitution which have been performing the functions falling within the authority of new organizations to be created under this Constitution shall continue to exist and perform such functions until such time as the new organizations are created under this Constitution.
