The state supports the strengthening of links with Romanians outside the country's borders and works for the preservation, development, and expression of their ethnic, cultural, linguistic, and religious identity, by respecting the legislation of the state of which they are citizens.
Trade unions, employers' associations, and vocational associations shall be established and shall carry out their activity according to their respective statutes, in conformity with the law. They shall contribute to the protection of their members' rights and the promotion of their vocational, economic and social interests.
Romania maintains and develops peaceful relations with all states and, in this framework, relations of good neighborliness based on the principles and generally accepted norms of international law.
In Romania, the official language is Romanian.
The capital of Romania is the Municipality of Bucharest.
Romanian citizens abroad shall enjoy the protection of the Romania state and shall fulfill their duties, except those which require their presence in the country.
The confidentiality of letters, cables, and other mail, and of telephone conversations and other means of communication is inviolable.
After Romania's accession to the European Union, Romanian citizens shall have the right to vote and to stand as candidates in elections to the European Parliament.
Meetings, demonstrations, parades, or any other form of assembly are free and may be organized and held only in a peaceful manner, without any kind of weapons.
The free access to an economic activity, to free enterprise and to their exercise in the terms defined by the law are guaranteed.
The right of inheritance is guaranteed.
Disabled persons shall enjoy special protection. The State shall ensure the implementation of a national policy of equal opportunities, disability prevention and treatment, so that disabled persons can take part effectively in community life, while respecting the rights and obligations of their parents or legal guardians.
Romanian citizens, foreign citizens, and stateless persons must exercise their constitutional rights and freedoms in good faith, without violating the rights and freedoms of others.
The People's Attorney reports to the two chambers of Parliament annually or at their request. The reports may contain recommendations concerning legislation or other measures designed to protect the rights and freedoms of the citizens.
The Chamber of Deputies and the Senate adopt laws, decisions, and motions with a majority of the members present.
The law shall be published in the Monitorul Oficial al României (Official Gazette of Romania) and come into force 3 days after its publication, or on a subsequent date specified in its text.
The President of Romania may consult with the Government on urgent and particularly important issues.
The President of Romania sends messages to Parliament on major political problems facing the nation.
The President of Romania, after consulting with Parliament, can ask the people to express their will on matters of national interest by means of referendum.
The President of Romania also has the following powers:
If the person acting as President of Romania in the interim period commits serious offenses which violate the provisions of the Constitution, Article 95 and Article 98 shall apply accordingly.
The remuneration and other rights of the President of Romania are regulated by law.
Membership in the Government is terminated by resignation, removal from office, loss of voting rights, incompatibility, or death, as well as in other cases established by law.
Decisions of a military nature are transmitted only to the institutions concerned.
The Supreme Council for National Defense organizes and coordinates, in a uniform manner, the activities related to national security and the defense of the country, its participation in the maintenance of international security and collective defense in military alliance systems, as well as in peace keeping or peace restoring operations.
Court hearings are public, except for cases stipulated by law.
The parties concerned and the Public Ministry may bring appeals against court decisions in the conditions defined by the law.
The courts of law have police forces at their disposal.
The Economic and Social Council serves as an advisory body to the Government and Parliament in the fields enumerated in the organic law governing its establishment, organization and functioning.
The justices of the Constitutional Court must have superior legal education, high professional competence, and at least 18 years of experience in the legal profession or at university law faculties.
The office of member of the Constitutional Court is incompatible with any other public or private office, with the exception of teaching positions at university law faculties.
The members of the Constitutional Court are independent in the exercise of their mandate and cannot be removed during the course of their term.
The Constitutional Court has the following functions:
Romania's accession to the North Atlantic Treaty shall be decided by a law adopted by the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate in joint session, with a majority of two-thirds of the deputies and senators.
The present Constitution shall come into the force on the date of its adoption by referendum. On the same day, the Constitution of 21 August 1965 is and remains repealed in its entirety.
The law for the revision of the Constitution shall be published in the Monitorul Oficial al Romăniei within 5 days after its adoption. The Legislative Council shall update the denominations and renumber the texts, and republish the Constitution in the amended and completed version after its approval by referendum.
