We, the multinational people of the Russian Federation,
united by a common fate on our land,
establishing human rights and freedoms, civil peace and accord,
preserving the historically established State unity,
proceeding from universally acknowledged principles of equality and self-determination of peoples,
revering the memory of ancestors who have passed on to us their love for the Fatherland and faith in good and justice,
reviving the sovereign statehood of Russia and asserting the firmness of its democratic basis,
striving to ensure the well-being and prosperity of Russia,
proceeding from the responsibility for our Fatherland before present and future generations,
recognizing ourselves to be a part of the world community,
do hereby adopt THE CONSTITUTION OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION.
Man, his rights and freedoms shall be the supreme value. The recognition, observance and protection of human and civil rights and freedoms shall be an obligation of the State.
State power in the Russian Federation shall be exercised on the basis of its division into legislative, executive and judicial authority. Bodies of legislative, executive and judicial authority shall be independent.
Local self-government shall be recognized and guaranteed in the Russian Federation. Local self-government shall be independent within the limits of its competence. Bodies of local self-government shall not form part of the system of State government bodies.
Human and civil rights and freedoms shall have direct force. They shall determine the meaning, content and implementation of laws, the functioning of legislative and executive authority and of local self-government, and shall be guaranteed by law.
The home shall be inviolable. Nobody shall have the right to enter a dwelling place against the will of those residing therein, except in those cases provided for by federal laws or on the basis of a court order.
Everyone shall be guaranteed freedom of conscience and religion, including the right to profess individually or collectively any religion or not to profess any religion, and freely to choose, possess and disseminate religious and other convictions and act in accordance with them.
Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to assemble peacefully, without weapons, hold rallies, mass meetings and demonstrations, marches and pickets.
Citizens of the Russian Federation shall have the right to appeal in person and make individual and collective appeals to State bodies and local self-government bodies.
Everyone shall have the right to a favourable environment, reliable information on the state of the environment and compensation for damage caused to his (her) health and property by violations of environmental laws.
The rights of victims of crimes and of abuses of office shall be protected by law. The State shall provide the victims with access to justice and compensation for damage sustained.
Everyone shall have the right to State compensation for damage caused by unlawful actions (inaction) of State government bodies and their officials.
Everyone shall be obliged to pay legally established taxes and levies. Laws, which establish new taxes or deteriorate the position of taxpayers, shall not have retroactive force.
Everyone shall have a duty to preserve nature and the environment and to treat natural resources with care.
A citizen of the Russian Federation may exercise all of his (her) rights and duties independently from the age of 18 years.
The provisions of this Chapter shall constitute the fundamental principles of the legal status of the individual in the Russian Federation and may not be changed otherwise than in accordance with the procedure which is established by this Constitution.
Republic of Adygeya (Adygeya), Republic of Altai, Republic of Bashkortostan, Republic of Buryatia, Republic of Crimea, Republic of Daghestan, Republic of Ingushetia, Kabardino-Balkarian Republic, Republic of Kalmykia, Karachayevo-Cherkessian Republic, Republic of Karelia, Komi Republic, Republic of Marij El, Republic of Mordovia, Republic of Sakha(Yakutia), Republic of North Osetia - Alania, Republic of Tatarstan (Tatarstan), Republic of Tuva, Udmurtian Republic, Republic of Khakasia, Chechen Republic, Chuvashi Republic - Chuvashia;
Altai kray, Krasnodar kray, Krasnoyarsk kray, Perm kray, Primorie kray, Stavropol kray, Khabarovsk kray;
Amur oblast, Arkhangelsk oblast, Astrakhan oblast, Belgorod oblast, Bryansk oblast, Vladimir oblast, Volgograd oblast, Vologda oblast, Voronezh oblast, Ivanovo oblast, Irkutsk oblast, Kaliningrad oblast, Kaluga oblast, Kamchatka oblast, Kemerovo oblast, Kirov oblast, Kostroma oblast, Kurgan oblast, Kursk oblast, Leningrad oblast, Lipets oblast, Magadan oblast, Moscow oblast, Murmansk oblast, Nizhni Novgorod oblast, Novgorod oblast, Novosibirsk oblast, Omsk oblast, Orenburg oblast, Oryol oblast, Penza oblast, Pskov oblast, Rostov oblast, Ryazan oblast, Samara oblast, Saratov oblast, Sakhalin oblast, Sverdlovsk oblast, Smolensk oblast, Tambov oblast, Tver oblast, Tomsk oblast, Tula oblast, Tyumen oblast, Ulyanovsk oblast, Chelyabinsk oblast, Chita oblast, Yaroslavl oblast;
Moscow, St. Petersburg, Sevastopol - cities of federal significance;
the Jewish autonomous oblast;
Nenets autonomous okrug, Khanty-Mansijsk autonomous okrug - Yugra, Chukotka autonomous okrug, Yamalo-Nenets autonomous okrug.
The Russian Federation shall guarantee the rights of indigenous small peoples in accordance with the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and international treaties of the Russian Federation.
The Russian Federation shall have jurisdiction over:
Outside the limits of authority of the Russian Federation and the powers of the Russian Federation on issues under the joint jurisdiction of the Russian Federation and constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the constituent entities of the Russian Federation shall enjoy full State power.
The Russian Federation may participate in interstate associations and transfer some of its powers to those associations in accordance with international treaties provided that this does not entail restrictions on human and civil rights and freedoms and does not conflict with the basic principles of the constitutional order of the Russian Federation.
"I swear that in exercising the powers of the President of the Russian Federation I shall respect and protect human and civil rights and freedoms, observe and protect the Constitution of the Russian Federation, protect the sovereignty and independence, security and integrity of the State, and faithfully serve the people".
The President of the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation, in the circumstances and in accordance with the procedure envisaged by federal constitutional law, shall introduce a state of emergency on the territory of the Russian Federation or on certain parts thereof and shall immediately inform the Council of Federation and the State Duma of this.
The President of the Russian Federation:
The President of the Russian Federation shall have immunity.
The Federal Assembly - parliament of the Russian Federation shall be the representative and legislative body of the Russian Federation.
Federal laws adopted by the State Duma on the following issues must compulsorily be examined by the Council of Federation:
The Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation, in accordance with the Constitution of the Russian Federation, federal laws and edicts of the President of the Russian Federation, shall determine the basic objectives of the activities of the Government of the Russian Federation and shall organize its work.
The Government of the Russian Federation shall resign its powers before a newly-elected President of the Russian Federation.
Judges shall be citizens of the Russian Federation over 25 years of age with a higher education in law who have served in the legal profession for not less than five years. Federal law may establish additional requirements for judges of the courts of the Russian Federation.
Courts shall be financed only from the federal budget and should ensure the possibility of the complete and independent administration of justice according to the requirements of federal law.
The Supreme Court of the Russian Federation shall be the highest judicial body for civil cases, settlement of economic disputes, criminal, administrative and other cases under the jurisdiction of courts formed in accordance with federal constitutional law; it shall exercise judicial supervision over their activities in the procedural forms envisaged by federal law and shall provide interpretation on issues of court proceedings.
[excluded in accordance with the Law of the Russian Federation on amendment to the Constitution of the Russian Federation of 5th February, 2014 No. 2-ФЗ]
Local self-government in the Russian Federation shall be guaranteed by the right to legal protection and compensation of additional expenses arising as a result of decisions adopted by State government bodies, and by a ban on restrictions of the rights of local self-government which are established by the Constitution of the Russian Federation and federal laws.
Proposals on amendments to and revision of the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation may be submitted by the President of the Russian Federation, the Council of Federation, the State Duma, the Government of the Russian Federation, legislative (representative) bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation, and by groups consisting of not less than one fifth of the members of the Council of Federation or of the deputies of the State Duma.
Amendments to the provisions of Chapters 3-8 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation shall be adopted in accordance with the procedure established for the adoption of federal constitutional law and shall come into force after they have been approved by legislative authorities of not less than two thirds of the constituent entities of the Russian Federation.
The day of the national referendum, December 12, 1993, shall be considered the day of adopting the Constitution of the Russian Federation.
At the same time the Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Russian Federation - Russia adopted on April 12, 1978 with all amendments and additions shall cease to have effect.
In the event of the non-conformity to the Constitution of the Russian Federation of the provisions of the Federation Treaty - Treaty on the division of authorities and powers between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and the State government bodies of constituent sovereign republics of the Russian Federation, the Treaty on the division of authorities and powers between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and the State government bodies of krays, oblasts, and the cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg of the Russian Federation, the Treaty on the division of authorities and powers between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and State government bodies of autonomous oblast and autonomous okrugs within the Russian Federation, and other treaties between federal State government bodies of the Russian Federation and State government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation and treaties between State government bodies of constituent entities of the Russian Federation, the provisions of the Constitution of the Russian Federation shall apply.
After the Constitution has come into force, judges of all courts of the Russian Federation shall retain their powers until the term for which they were elected expires. Vacant positions shall be filled in accordance with the procedure established by this Constitution.
Until criminal-procedural legislation of the Russian Federation has been brought into line with the provisions of this Constitution, the previous procedure for the arrest, detention and keeping in custody of persons suspected of committing a crime shall apply.
Deputies of the Council of Federation of the first convocation shall exercise their powers on a non-permanent basis.
