IN THE HOLY NAME OF GOD, THE ALMIGHTY, THE EVER LOVING
WHEREAS sovereignty over the Universe belongs to the Omni-present God alone, and the authority to be exercised by the people of Samoa within the limits prescribed by God's commandments is a sacred heritage;
WHEREAS the Leaders of Samoa have declared that Samoa should be an Independent State based on Christian principles and Samoan custom and tradition;
AND WHEREAS the Constitutional Convention, representing the people of Samoa, has resolved to frame a Constitution for the Independent State of Samoa;
WHEREIN the State should exercise its powers and authority through the chosen representatives of the people;
WHEREIN should be secured to all the people their fundamental rights;
WHEREIN the impartial administration of justice should be fully maintained;
AND WHEREIN the integrity of Samoa, its independence, and all its rights should be safeguarded;
Now THEREFORE, we the people of Samoa in our Constitutional Convention, this twenty-eighth day of October 1960, do hereby adopt, enact, and give to ourselves this Constitution.
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, "the State" includes the Head of State, Cabinet, Parliament and all local and other authorities established under any law.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Provided that the State shall direct its policy towards the progressive removal of any disability or restriction which has been imposed on any of the grounds referred to in clause (2) and of any privilege or advantage which has been conferred on any of those grounds.
There shall be a Head of State of Samoa to be known as O le Ao o le Malo.
Article 17 ceased to be in force on the death of Malietoa Tanumafili II on the eleventh day of May 2007 pursuant to clause (5).
Provided that, notwithstanding the expiry of his or her term, he shall continue to hold office until his or her successor assumes the functions of his or her office or for a period of three months, whichever is the shorter period.
The Head of State shall not hold any other office of profit or any other position carrying the right to remuneration for the rendering of services, or engage in any occupation for reward outside the functions of his or her office; but nothing in this clause shall prevent him or her from holding the pule over any customary land, from holding any freehold land or other private property, or from disposing of the produce of any customary or freehold land.
The salary of the Head of State shall be determined by Act and shall be charged on the Treasury Fund, and that salary shall not be diminished during the period of office of the Head of State, unless as part of a general reduction of salaries applied proportionately to all persons whose salaries are determined by Act.
While Tupua Tamasese Meaole and Malietoa Tanumafili II hold jointly the office of Head of State, the following provisions shall apply:
Provided that, if the Assembly shall not have elected a Council of Deputies, the Chief Justice shall assume the functions of the Council.
Provided that, while the provisions of Article 17 are in force, an election of members of the Council of Deputies shall be held as soon as possible after Independence Day and, thereafter, at intervals of not less than four years and nine months and not more than five years and three months.
Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not disqualified a member of the Council from being elected to the office of Head of State.
It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister
The Head of State and each member of the Council of Deputies shall, before assuming the functions of his or her office, take and subscribe before the Chief Justice an oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
The Head of State shall keep and use the Public Seal of Samoa.
There shall be a Secretary to the Head of State.
Provided that, if after the passing of such a motion or after that defeat the Prime Minister so requests, the Head of State may dissolve the Legislative Assembly instead of terminating the appointment of the Prime Minister; or
Every Minister shall, before assuming the functions of his or her office, take and subscribe before the Head of State an oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Cabinet shall be summoned only by the Prime Minister or, in his or her absence, by such Minister as the Prime Minister shall appoint in that behalf.
There shall be a Parliament of Samoa, which shall consist of the Head of State and the Legislative Assembly.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any part of Samoa and laws having effect outside as well as within Samoa.
“Highest number of votes” means the percentage of the total valid votes in a constituency polled by a woman candidate;
“Prescribed number” means the minimum number of women Members of Parliament specified under clause (1A).
All questions that may arise as to the right of any person to be or to remain a Member of Parliament shall be referred to and determined by the Supreme Court.
Whenever the seat of a Member of Parliament becomes vacant under the provisions of clause (2) of Article 46, the Speaker shall, by writing under his or her hand, report that vacancy to the Head of State, and the vacancy shall be filled by election in the manner provided by law.
There shall be a Clerk of the Legislative Assembly.
The Legislative Assembly shall meet at such times and at such places as the Head of State appoints from time to time in that behalf by notice published in the Samoa Gazette and recorded in the Savali:
Provided that the assembly shall meet not later than forty-five days after the holding of a general election and at least once in every year thereafter, so that a period of twelve months shall not intervene between the last sitting of the Assembly in one session and the first sitting thereof in the next session.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly may make, amend and repeal standing orders regulating its procedure.
The Speaker, or in his or her absence the Deputy Speaker, shall preside over sittings of the Legislative Assembly. In the absence from any sitting of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, the Members of Parliament present shall choose one of their number (not being a Minister) to preside over that sitting.
The Legislative Assembly shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy among the Members of Parliament, including any vacancy not filled at a general election, and any proceedings therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled to do so sat or voted in the Assembly or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
No business shall be transacted at any sitting of the Legislative Assembly if objection is taken by any Member of Parliament present that the number of Members present is (besides the Speaker or other Member presiding) fewer than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament (excluding vacancies).
Subject to the provisions of this Part and of the Standing Orders of the Legislative Assembly, any Member of Parliament may introduce any bill or propose any motion for debate in the Assembly or present any petition to the Assembly, and the same shall be considered and disposed of under the provisions of the Standing Orders:
Provided that, except upon the recommendation or with the consent of the Head of State, the Assembly shall not proceed upon any bill which, in the opinion of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker or other Member of Parliament presiding, would dispose of or charge the Treasury Fund or any other public fund or account, or revoke or alter any disposition thereof or charge thereon, or impose, alter or repeal any tax, rate or duty.
Except for the purpose of enabling this Article to be complied with and for the election of a Speaker, no Member of Parliament shall sit or vote in the Legislative Assembly until he shall have taken and subscribed before the Assembly an Oath of Allegiance in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
The privileges, immunities and powers of the Legislative Assembly, of the committees thereof and of Members of Parliament may be determined by Act:
Provided that no such privilege or power may extend to the imposition of a fine or to committal to prison for contempt or otherwise, unless provision is made by Act for the trial and punishment of the person concerned by the Supreme Court.
There shall be a general election of the Legislative Assembly at such time within three months after every dissolution of the Assembly as the Head of State appoints by notice in the Samoa Gazette.
Each Judge of the Supreme Court or any two or more Judges may, in any part of Samoa and at any time or place, exercise all the powers of the Supreme Court.
Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall, before assuming the functions of his or her office, take and subscribe before the Head of State an oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Provided that the Head of State, acting (in the case of the Chief Justice) on the advice of the Prime Minister or (in the case of any other Judge of the Supreme Court) on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, may extend the period of office of a Judge who has reached the age of 68 years.
The salaries of Judges of the Supreme Court to whom clause (1) of Article 68 applies shall be determined by Act and shall be charged on the Treasury Fund. The salaries of such Judges shall not be diminished during their period of office, unless as part of a general reduction of salaries applied proportionately to all persons whose salaries are determined by Act.
Provided that a person may be so appointed notwithstanding that he has attained the age of 68 years.
Provided that he may at any time resign his or her office by writing under his or her hand addressed to the Head of State.
There shall be such subordinate courts possessing such jurisdiction and powers as may be provided by Act.
Provided that the Court may have its judgment delivered by any one of its members who is also a Judge of the Supreme Court, and if there is no such member then through the Registrar of the Court of Appeal.
A Judge of the Court of Appeal shall not sit on the hearing of an appeal from any decision made by him or her or by a court on which he sat as a member.
Any person appointed under the provisions of subclause (b) of clause (2) of Article 75 to be a Judge of the Court of Appeal shall, on first appointment, take and subscribe before the Head of State an oath in the form set out in the Third Schedule.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine such appeals (including proceedings removed by order of the Supreme Court to the Court of Appeal) as may be provided by Act.
An appeal shall lie to the Court of Appeal from any decision of the Supreme Court in any proceedings under the provisions of Article 4.
In Articles 77, 80, 81 and 119, "decision" includes judgment, decree, order, writ, declaration, conviction, sentence, opinion or other determination.
The functions of the Ombudsman are:
The "Public Service" means the service of Samoa; but does not include service remunerated by way of fees or commission only, honorary service, or service in any of the following capacities, namely as:
The salaries of members of the Public Service Commission shall be determined by the Head of State, acting on the advice of the Prime Minister.
There shall be a Treasury Fund and such other public funds or accounts as may be provided by Act.
No taxation shall be imposed except by Parliament.
All taxes and other revenues and money raised or received by Samoa shall be paid into the Treasury Fund unless required or permitted by Act to be paid into any other public fund or account.
No money shall be issued out of the Treasury Fund or any other public fund or account except in pursuance of a warrant under the hand of the Head of State.
the Minister responsible for finance shall cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly supplementary estimates in respect of that expenditure, and the proposals for expenditure therein contained shall be submitted to the vote of the Assembly by means of a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
If an Appropriation Bill has not become law by the first day of the financial year to which it relates, the Minister responsible for finance may, with the prior approval of Cabinet, authorise such expenditure (not otherwise authorise by Act) as he may consider essential for the continuance of any services, until an Appropriation Bill becomes law:
PROVIDED THAT the expenditure so authorised shall not exceed an amount equal to one-fourth of the relevant vote approved in the Appropriation Act for the preceding year.
A vote for unforeseen expenditure not exceeding 3% of the total Appropriation Bill shall be included in the annual estimates laid before the Legislative Assembly. Where, during the period between the passing of the Appropriation Act for any financial year and the end of the year, it is desirable that money should be expended in excess of or without appropriation of the Legislative Assembly, Cabinet or, to the extent that Cabinet so authorises, the Minister responsible for Finance may authorise the transfer of funds to one or more nominated votes from the unforeseen expenditure vote:
PROVIDED THAT the amount is available to be transferred from the unforeseen expenditure vote AND the total amount of all sums issued and paid under the provisions of this Article shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of all sums appropriated by the Appropriation Act for that year.
Except as provided by Act or authorised by resolution of the Legislative Assembly, the Controller and Auditor General shall not:
The Controller and Auditor General may resign from office by giving the Head of State a signed letter of resignation.
A Matai title shall be held in accordance with Samoan custom and usage and with the law relating to Samoan custom and usage.
It shall not be lawful or competent for any person to make any alienation or disposition of customary land or of any interest in customary land, whether by way of sale, mortgage or otherwise howsoever, nor shall customary land or any interest therein be capable of being taken in execution or be assets for the payment of the debts of any person on his or her decease or insolvency:
Provided that an Act of Parliament may authorise
There shall be a Land and Titles Court with such composition and with such jurisdiction in relation to Matai titles and customary land as may be provided by Act.
Provided that, if not less than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament (excluding vacancies) by notice in writing to the Head of State require that a time for the meeting of the Assembly be appointed for the purposes of this clause, the Head of State shall appoint such a time which shall be not later than seven days after the date of receipt of that notice.
Provided that no bill amending, repealing or adding to the provisions of Article 102 or the provisions of this proviso shall be submitted to the Head of State for assent until it has been submitted to a poll of the electors on the rolls for the territorial constituencies established under the provisions of Article 44 and unless it has been supported by two-thirds of the valid votes cast in such a poll.
"Cabinet" means the Cabinet of Ministers:
"Chief Justice" means the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Samoa:
"Court of Appeal" means the Court of Appeal of Samoa:
"Employee of the Public Service" means a person employed in the Public Service:
"Existing law" means any law in force in the Trust Territory of Samoa or any part thereof immediately before Independence Day:
"Head of State" means the Head of State of Samoa:
"High Court" means the High Court of Samoa constituted under the provisions of the Samoa Act 1921:
"Independence Day" means the day on which this Constitution comes into force under the provisions of Article 113:
"Judicial officer" means the holder of any judicial office, but does not include an employee of the Public Service who exercises all or any of the functions of a judicial office:
"Law" means any law for the time being in force in Samoa; and includes this Constitution, any Act of Parliament and any proclamation, regulation, order, by-law or other act of authority made thereunder, the English common law and equity for the time being in so far as they are not excluded by any other law in force in Samoa, and any custom or usage which has acquired the force of law in Samoa or any part thereof under the provisions of any Act or under a judgement of a Court of competent jurisdiction:
"Legislative Assembly" means the Legislative Assembly constituted under the provisions of Article 44:
"Legislative Assembly of the Trust Territory" means the Legislative Assembly constituted under the provisions of the Samoa Amendment Act 1957 and in being immediately before Independence Day:
"Minister" includes the Prime Minister:
"Office of profit" means any office in the service of Samoa carrying the right to salary, and includes any office declared by Act to be an office of profit:
"Officer of the Public Service" means an employee of the Public Service other than a person employed in a temporary capacity or on probation:
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Samoa:
"Proclamation" means a proclamation made by the Head of State under his or her hand and the Public Seal of Samoa and published in the Samoa Gazette:
"Property" includes real and personal property, any estate or interest in any real or personal property, any debt, anything in action, and any other right or interest:
"Public Seal" means the Public Seal of Samoa:
"Public Service Commission" means the Public Service Commission of Samoa:
"Salary" includes salary or wages, allowances, superannuation rights, free or subsidised housing, free or subsidised transport, and other privileges capable of being valued in money:
"Service of Samoa" means service in any capacity of Samoa; and includes service in any of the capacities named in subclauses (a) to (m) inclusive of Article 83, but not service in respect of the Samoa Trust Estates Corporation:
"Speaker" means the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly:
"Supreme Court" means the Supreme Court of Samoa:
"Samoa Trust Estates Corporations" means the corporation constituted under the name "Western Samoa Trust Estates Corporation" on Independence Day.
The Samoan and English texts of this Constitution are equally authoritative but, in case of difference, the English text shall prevail.
This Constitution shall come into force on the day approved by the General Assembly of the United Nations as the date of the termination of the Trusteeship Agreement for the Territory of Samoa approved by the General Assembly on 13 December 1946.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
Any person holding office as Prime Minister or as a Minister immediately before Independence Day shall be deemed to have been duly appointed thereto under the provisions of Part IV.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a person holding office as a Judge of the High Court immediately before Independence Day shall, on and after that day, hold the office of Judge of the Supreme Court on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him or her immediately before Independence Day.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution
Where any Ordinance was enacted or made by the Legislative Assembly of the Trust Territory and the coming into force of that Ordinance was suspended, that Ordinance may, on or after Independence Day, come into force on the date specified therein or as may be specified by any authority empowered to bring it into force; and, in such case, the Ordinance shall, on and after that date, take effect as an Act of Parliament.
Where in the existing law reference is made to Her Majesty the Queen in right of the Trust Territory of Samoa, to the Crown in right of the Trust Territory of Samoa, to the Trust Territory of Samoa, to Samoa or to Samoa, that reference shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be construed as a reference to Samoa.
No amendments to the provisions of this Constitution shall be made before Parliament is constituted under the provisions of Part V, except such as the Legislative Assembly of the Trust Territory may make by Ordinance to remove any difficulties in the transition from the constitutional arrangements in force immediately before Independence Day to those provided for in this Constitution; and any Ordinance made under the provisions of this Article shall, unless sooner repealed, cease to be in force at the expiry of a period of nine months beginning with the day on which the Legislative Assembly first meets.
[Repealed by Act 19 of 2015].
[Repealed by Act 19 of 2015].
I, .........., swear by Almighty God that I will uphold the dignity of the office of Head of State, and will justly and faithfully carry out my duties in the administration of the Independent State of Samoa in accordance with the Constitution and the law. So help me God.
I, .........., swear by Almighty God that I will well and truly serve the Independent State of Samoa, and will justly and faithfully carry out my duties as a member of the Council of Deputies in accordance with the Constitution and the law. So help me God.
I, .........., being chosen and accepted as Prime Minister [a Minister] and member of Cabinet swear by Almighty God that I will to the best of my judgment, at all times when thereto required, freely give my counsel and advice to the Head of State, for the good management of the affairs of the Independent State of Samoa, and that I will not directly or indirectly reveal such matters as shall be debated in Cabinet and Committee and in Executive Council and committed to my secrecy, but that I will in all things be a true and faithful Prime Minister [Minister]. So help me God.
I, , swear by Almighty God that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Independent State of Samoa, and that I will justly and faithfully carry out my duties as a Member of the Parliament of Samoa. So help me God.
I, , swear by Almighty God that I will well and truly serve the Independent State of Samoa in accordance with the Constitution and the law, and I will do right to all manner of people, without fear or favour, affection or ill will. So help me God.
