During five centuries the Sao Tomean People were locked in a hard and heroic struggle against colonial domination for the liberty of their occupied Country, for the conquest of Sovereignty and National Independence, for the restoration of their usurped rights and for the reaffirmation of their human dignity and African character.
On 12th July, 1975, under the enlightened direction of the Liberation Movement of S. Tome and Principe—M.L.S.T.P, the Sao Tomean People attained their National Independence and proclaimed before Africa and all Humanity the Democratic Republic of S. Tome and Principe. That victory, the greatest of our History only was possible thanks to the sacrifices and to the determination of valiant sons of S. Tome and Principe who, for centuries, always resisted the colonial presence, and in 1960 organized themselves in C.L.S.T.P. and later on, in 1972 in M.L.S.T.P., until achieving the supreme objective of national liberation.
With the proclamation of National Independence, the Representative Assembly of the S. Tomean People entrusted to the Political Bureau of the M.L.S.T.P., through a stipulation in the 3rd Article of the Fundamental Law then approved, the heavy responsibility of, as the highest political organ of the Nation, assuming the leadership of the society and of the State in S. Tome and Principe, targeting the noble objective of guaranteeing independence and national unity, through the building of a Democratic State in accordance with the maximum plan of the M.L.S.T.P.
Fifteen years later and after deep analysis of the experience of legitimate exercise of power by M.L.S.T.P., the Central Committee in its session of December, 1989, faithful to the patriotic duty of promoting the balanced and harmonious development of S. Tome and Principe, decided to sanction formally the just national aspirations, expressed during the National Conference, of 5th to 8th December of 1989, in the sense of opening the necessary space to the participation of other politically organized forces, with a view toward broadening democracy, for the modernization of S. Tome and Principe.
Inspired by the historic necessity of promoting increasingly broader and responsible participation of the citizen in the various dominions of the national life, this present revision to the constitutional text, in addition to consecrating the principle that the monopoly of power does not constitute by itself alone sufficient guarantee of progress, represents the collective will of the Sao Tomeans in giving their share of contribution to the universality of the fundamental rights and freedoms of mankind.
Accordingly, with the approval by the People’s National Assembly, exercising the powers that are conferred on it by subparagraph i) of Article 32, and ratified by a Popular Referendum, under paragraph 2 of article 70, both of the current Constitution, I now promulgate the following Constitution:
The Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe is a sovereign and independent State, pledged to the building of a free, just and interdependent society, to the defense of human rights and in an active solidarity among all men and all peoples.
The Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe guarantees the Sao Tomean national identity and encompasses every and any Sao Tomean resident within or outside its territory.
The State of democratic rule of law means the safeguarding of justice and legality as fundamental values of collective life.
The Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe is a lay State, within it existing a separation of the State with respect to all religious institutions.
Prime objectives of the State are:
Every citizen has the right of resorting to the courts against acts which violate his rights recognized by the Constitution and by the law, justice not being deniable for insufficiency of economic means.
The citizens have obligations with respect to society and the State, not being able to exercise their rights through violation of the rights of the other citizens, and not respecting the just demands of morality, of public order and of national independence defined in the law.
Personal identity and the confidentiality of the intimacy of private and family life are inviolable.
Intellectual, artistic and scientific creation are free.
All have the right to freely choose a profession or a type of work, with the exception of the legal  restrictions imposed by the collective interest or inherent to the profession.
All the workers have rights:
The State protects the inherent rights to intellectual property, including the rights of the author.
Children have the right to the respect and to the protection of the society and of the State, with a view toward their complete development.
The youth, especially the young workers, enjoy special protection in order to render effective their economic, social and cultural rights.
Persons of advanced age have the right to satisfactory family life and economic security.
All citizens have the right to take part in public life and in the direction of the affairs of the country, directly or by through freely elected representatives.
All citizens of more than eighteen years have the right of suffrage, excepting incompetence as provided in the general law.
All citizens have the right of access, in conditions of equality, and liberty, to public office.
All citizens have the right to present, individually or collectively, to the organs of political power or to any authority petitions, representations, protests or complaints for defense of their rights in the Constitution, in the laws or of the general interest.
Every citizen has the right to be indemnified for damage caused by illegal and harmful actions to his legitimate rights and interests, whether from State organs, Social Organizations or whether from public officials.
The State supports and protects the social organizations recognized by law which, in correspondence with specific interests, frame and foment the civic participation of the citizens.
The participation and direct and active involvement of citizens in the political life constitutes a fundamental condition of consolidation of the Republic.
Organs of Sovereignty are:
Upon being empowered in their offices, the heads of organs of the State make the following oath:
“I swear, by my honor, to fulfill an ensure the fulfillment of the Constitution and the laws, to defend the national independence, to promote the economic, social and cultural progress of the Sao Tomean people and to perform with all loyalty and dedication the functions which are entrusted to me.”
The deliberations of the collegial organs of political power are taken in harmony with the principles of free discussion and criticism and the acceptance of the will of the majority.
The President of the Republic is the Chief of State and the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces, represents the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe, guarantees the national independence and ensures the regular operation of the institutions.
The President of the Republic has the competences for:
As regards other bodies the President of the Republic has the following:
In the area of international relations the President of the Republic has the following competences:
In the exercise of his powers and competence, the President of the Republic determines the form of the Presidential Decree.
The National Assembly is the highest representative and legislative organ of the State.
The Deputies have, by designation, the following powers:
The National Assembly is charged with:
The National Assembly has exclusive power for legislating on the following matters:
The decrees-laws published until one month before each legislative session, in exercise of its delegated legislative authority, are considered ratified if, in the first five plenary sessions of the National Assembly subsequent to their publication, no Deputy requires they be submitted for ratification.
The legislature has a term of four years and begins with the swearing in of all its members.
The members of the Government may take part and speak in the plenary sessions of the National Assembly, in the terms of the By-laws.
The Government is the executive and administrative organ of the State, with responsibility to conduct the overall policy of the State.
The Government’s powers are:
The Government is politically responsible before the President of the Republic and the National Assembly.
The Government’s Program is subject to consideration by the National Assembly by means of a statement by the Prime Minister, within a maximum of thirty days following its appointment.
The members of the Government are bound to the Government’s program and to the deliberations taken in the Council of Ministers.
The courts are independent and are subject only to the laws.
The hearings of the courts are public except when the court itself decides to the contrary, in well-founded decision, in order to safeguard the dignity of the individuals and of the public moral or to guarantee their normal operation.
The law presupposes and stimulates appropriate forms of popular participation in the administration of justice.
The Supreme Court of Justice is the highest judicial tribunal of the Republic and it is responsible for watching over the harmony of jurisprudence.
The law establishes the rules relating to the venue, organization and operation of the Constitutional Court.
The organization of local authorities in each District consists of an elected District Assembly with deliberative powers and a collegial executive body, called District Council.
The members of the District Assemblies are elected for three years and may have their mandate revoked by popular initiative, in the terms of the law.
The following may not be the subject of a revision to the Constitution:
During a state of siege or emergency it is not possible to carry out any revision of the Constitution.
Legislation in force on the date of National Independence remains transitorily in effect in all that  may not be contrary to the present Constitution and to the remaining laws of the Republic.
The Constitution of the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe has 5 November 1975 as the date on which it was approved in a joint meeting of the Political Bureau of the MLSTP and the Assembly in the process of being set up, published in the Diário da República, no. 39 of 15 December 1975.
The First Text of the Constitutional Law, no. 1/80, published in the Diário da República no. 7, of 7 February—First Constitutional Revision.
The Second Text of the Constitutional Law, no. 2/82, published in the Diário da República no. 35, of 31 December 1982—Second Constitutional Revision.
The Law on Amendment of the Constitution, no. 1/87, of 31 December—published on the fourth Supplement to the Diário da República no. 13, of 31 December 1987.—Third Constitutional Revision.
Third Text of the Constitutional Law no. 7/90, published in the Diário da República no. 13 of 20 September 1990—Fourth Constitutional Revision.
Fourth Text of the Constitutional Law no. 1/2003, published in the Diário da República no. 2, of 29 January 2003—Fifth Constitutional Revision.
"Art. 80 (Competence)
The President of the Republic has the following duties:
a) To defend the Constitution of the Republic;
b) To direct the country’s foreign policy and to represent the State in its international relations;
c) To direct the defense and security policy;
d) In observance of the electoral law, to set the date for elections of the President of the Republic, of the National Assembly and of the Assemblies with Regional and Local Power;
e) To convene extraordinary meetings of the National Assembly whenever there are compelling reasons of public interest to do so;
f) To send messages to the National Assembly;
g) To appoint, empower and dismiss the Prime Minister;
h) To appoint, dismiss and empower the other Members of Government, on the  proposal of the Prime Minister, and to invest them;
i) To preside over the Council of Ministers whenever he decides to do so;
j) To appoint and dismiss the Attorney-General of the Republic on the proposal of the Government;
k) To appoint and dismiss ambassadors;
l) To accredit foreign ambassadors;
m) To promulgate laws, decree-laws and decrees;
n) To grant pardons and commute sentences;
o) To dissolve the National Assembly, observing the provisions of article 103, and after consulting with the political parties having seats in the National Assembly;
p) To declare a state of siege and emergency;
q) To declare war and make peace;
r) To award State honors;
s) To exercise the other duties conferred on him by law."
