Sierra Leone is a Sovereign Republic, the boundaries of which are delimited in the First Schedule hereto.
The Public Seal of the Republic shall be such a device as Parliament shall prescribe.
All organs of Government and all authorities and persons exercising legislative, executive or judicial powers shall conform to, observe and apply the provisions of this Chapter.
The Foreign Policy Objectives of the State shall be—
The press, radio and television and other agencies of the mass media shall at all times be free to uphold the fundamental objectives contained in this Constitution and highlight the responsibility and accountability of the Government to the people.
The Government shall—
Every citizen shall—
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4, the provisions contained in this Chapter shall not confer legal rights and shall not be enforceable in any court of law, but the principles contained therein shall nevertheless be fundamental in the governance of the State, and it shall be the duty of Parliament to apply these principles in making laws.
Whereas every person in Sierra Leone is entitled to the fundamental human rights and freedoms of the individual, that is to say, has the right, whatever his race, tribe, place of origin, political opinion, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following—
the subsequent provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to the aforesaid rights and freedoms, subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any individual does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others, or the public interest.
and if any person arrested or detained in such a case as is mentioned in the said paragraph (f) is not tried within the periods specified in paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, as the case may be, then without prejudice to any further proceedings which may be brought against him he shall be released either unconditionally or upon reasonable conditions, including in particular, such conditions as are reasonably necessary to ensure that he appears at a later date for trial or proceedings preliminary to trial.
Provided that no court or other authority shall prohibit any such person from entering into or residing in any place to which he is indigenous; or
and except in so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Provided that the court or other authority may, to such an extent as it may consider necessary or expedient in circumstances where publicity would prejudice the interest of justice or interlocutory civil proceedings or to such extent as it may be empowered or required by law so to do in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality, the welfare of persons under the age of twenty-one years or the protection of the private lives of persons concerned in the proceedings, exclude from its proceedings, persons other than the parties thereto and their legal representatives.
Provided that nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this subsection, to the extent that the law in  question imposes on any person charged as aforesaid the burden of proving particular facts.
Provided that nothing contained in or done under the authority of any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this subsection to the extent that the law in question prohibits legal representation in a Local Court.
Provided that nothing in any law shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of this subsection by reason only that it authorises any court to try a member of a defence force for a criminal offence notwithstanding any trial and conviction or acquittal of that member under service law; but any court so trying such a member and convicting him shall in sentencing him to any punishment take into account any punishment awarded him under service law.
and except in so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Provided that no person other than the Government or any person or body authorised by the President shall own, establish or operate a television or wireless broadcasting station for any purpose whatsoever.
and except in so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof, is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except in so far as that provision, or as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Provided that the Supreme Court shall not exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
unless it has in the meantime been approved by or superseded by a Resolution of Parliament supported by the votes of two-thirds of the Members of Parliament.
Provided that such amendment, suspension or modification shall not apply to this Constitution;
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall authorise the making of regulations during a period of public emergency for the trial of persons who are not members of defence forces by military courts.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, supported by the votes of two-thirds of Members of Parliament, each extension not exceeding twelve months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a resolution supported by the votes of a simple majority of all the Members of Parliament.
“court” means any court of law in Sierra Leone other than a local court or a court constituted by or under service law and—
“defence force” means any naval, military or airforce of the Government of the Republic of Sierra Leone;
“member” in relation to a defence force or other disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline;
“owner” includes any person or his successor in title deprived of any right or interest pursuant to section 21; and
“service law” means the law regarding the discipline of a defence force or of the Sierra Leone Police Force or the Prisons Service or any disciplined volunteer force.
Every citizen of Sierra Leone being eighteen years of age and above and of sound mind shall have the right to vote, and accordingly shall be entitled to be registered as a voter for the purposes of public elections and referenda.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Electoral Commission shall be responsible for the conduct and supervision of the registration of voters for, and of, all public elections and referenda; and for that purpose shall have power to make regulations by statutory instrument for the registration of voters, the conduct of Presidential, Parliamentary or Local Government elections and referenda, and other matters connected therewith, including regulations for voting by proxy.
Provided that the first registration of political parties after the coming into force of this Constitution shall be undertaken by the Electoral Commission.
“political party” means any association registered as a political party as prescribed by subsection (5).
At any public elections or referenda voting shall be by secret ballot.
Provided that the number of inhabitants of such a constituency may be greater or less than the population quota in order to take account of means of communications, geographical features, density of population, the distribution of different communities, the areas and boundaries of the Chiefdoms and other administrative or traditional areas.
Provided that the Commission may at any time carry out such a review and alter the constituencies in accordance with the provisions of this section to such extent as it considers necessary in consequence of any alteration in the number of Members of Parliament referred to in paragraph (b) of subsection (1) of section 74 by reason of the holding of a census of the population of Sierra Leone in pursuance of an Act of Parliament.
Provided that if Parliament is dissolved before such election is due to be held, the vacancy shall be filled at the general election.
Provided that any Treaty, Agreement or Convention executed by or under the authority of the President which relates to any matter within the legislative competence of Parliament, or which in any way alters the law of Sierra Leone or imposes any charge on, or authorises any expenditure out of, the Consolidated Fund or any other fund of Sierra Leone, and any declaration of war made by the President shall be subject to ratification by Parliament—
No person shall be qualified for election as President unless he—
A Presidential election shall take place—
Provided that—
Parliament shall make laws for the purpose of regulating the election of the President and other matters connected therewith.
shall be referred to and determined by the Supreme Court.
The President shall be entitled to address Parliament in person or to send a message to Parliament to be read by his Vice-President or a Minister on his behalf.
Provided that the President shall not resign or retire from this office even at the due expiration of his term of office while a general election of Members of Parliament is pending within the ensuing three months, or where a state of public emergency has been declared.
Provided that the President shall always act in accordance with his deliberate judgement in signifying his approval for the purpose of an appointment to an office on his personal staff.
The office of the Vice-President shall become vacant—
Provided that no Member of Parliament shall be appointed a Minister or Deputy Minister.
Provided that the Vice-President, the Ministers and the Deputy Ministers shall be entitled to such remuneration allowances, gratuities, pensions, and other incidents of office as may be prescribed by Parliament.
A Minister or a Deputy Minister shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath for the due execution of his duties as set out in the Third Schedule.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any Act of Parliament, the President may constitute offices for Sierra Leone, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.
Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of Government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department and, subject to such direction and control, the department shall be under the supervision of a Permanent Secretary, whose office shall be a public office:
Provided that two or more Departments of Government may be placed under the supervision of one Permanent Secretary.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this section shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority at any stage before the person against whom the proceedings have been instituted has been charged before the court.
The President may appoint, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or any other law the following persons—
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 152 of this Constitution and save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the President shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution or any other law, appoint—
Subject to the provisions of section 76, any person who—
shall be qualified for election as such a Member of Parliament:
Provided that a person who becomes a citizen of Sierra Leone by registration by law shall not be qualified for election as such a Member of Parliament or of any Local Authority unless he shall have resided continuously in Sierra Leone for twenty-five years after such registration or shall have served in the Civil or Regular Armed Services of Sierra Leone for a continuous period of twenty-five years.
Provided that in any such case the period of disqualification shall not exceed a period of five years from the date of the general election following the one for which he was disqualified.
and who are not less than forty years.
Provided that if three successive resolutions proposing the election of a Speaker fail to receive the votes of two-thirds of the Members of Parliament, the Speaker shall be elected by a resolution passed by a simple majority of all the Members of Parliament.
On any resolution for the election or removal of a Speaker or Deputy Speaker, the votes of the Members of Parliament shall be given by ballot in such manner as not to disclose how any particular member votes.
Every Member of Parliament shall, before taking his seat in Parliament, take and subscribe before Parliament the oath as set out in the Third Schedule, but a Member may, before taking that oath, take part in the election of a Speaker.
Provided that there shall be a session of Parliament not later than twenty-eight days from the holding of a general election of Members of Parliament.
Provided that nominations for such elections shall in no case be closed within fourteen days after dissolution.
shall be deemed together to form one session.
There shall preside at any sitting of Parliament—
Provided that when the President addresses Parliament or attends in person, the Speaker shall leave his chair and no other person shall preside during such address or attendance.
If objection is taken by any Member of Parliament that there are present in Parliament (besides the person presiding) less than one-fourth of all the Members of Parliament and the person presiding shall be so satisfied he shall thereupon adjourn Parliament.
The business of Parliament shall be conducted in the English Language.
Any person who sits or votes in Parliament knowing or having reasonable ground for knowing that he is not entitled to do so shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one thousand leones or such other sum as may be prescribed by Parliament for each day in which he so sits or votes in Parliament, which shall be recoverable by action in the High Court at the suit of the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice.
Any act or omission which obstructs or impedes Parliament in the performance of its functions, or which obstructs or impedes any Member or officer thereof in the discharge of his duties or affronts the dignity of Parliament, or which tends either directly or indirectly to produce such a result shall be a contempt of Parliament.
Where an act or omission which constitutes contempt of Parliament is an offence under the criminal law, the exercise by Parliament of the power to punish for contempt shall not be a bar to the institution of proceedings under the criminal law.
The responsibilities of the Members of Parliament shall include the following—
There shall be freedom of speech, debate and proceedings in Parliament and that freedom shall not be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament.
No civil or criminal process issuing from any court or place out of Parliament shall be served on or executed in relation to the Speaker or a Member or the Clerk of Parliament while he is on his way to attending or returning from any proceedings of Parliament.
Neither the Speaker nor any Member of, nor the Clerk of, Parliament shall be required to serve on a jury in any court or place out of Parliament.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no person shall be under any civil or criminal liability in respect of the publication of—
unless it is shown that the publication was effected maliciously or otherwise in want of good faith.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall be the supreme legislative authority for Sierra Leone.
Provided that not less than nine days shall elapse between the first publication of the Bill in the Gazette and the second publication; and
shall not be submitted to the President for his assent and shall not become law unless the Bill, after it has been passed by Parliament and in the form in which it was so passed, has, in accordance with the provisions of any law in that behalf, been submitted to and been approved at a referendum.
Provided that in calculating the total number of persons entitled to vote at such referendum, the names of deceased persons, of persons disqualified as electors, and of persons duplicated in the register of electors and so certified by the Electoral Commission, shall not be taken into account.
Subject to the provisions of section 105 of this Constitution, where on any matter, whether arising out of this Constitution or otherwise there is no provision, expressed or by necessary implication, of this Constitution which deals with the matter that has arisen, Parliament shall, by an Act of Parliament, not being inconsistent with any provision of this Constitution, provide for that matter to be dealt with.
Provided that any such order shall, unless sooner revoked, cease to have effect—
Provided that—
Where it appears to the Minister responsible for finance that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, he may, with the prior approval of Parliament signified in that behalf by a resolution thereof, authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government in respect of the period expiring four months from the beginning of the financial year or on the coming into operation of the Act, whichever is earlier.
Provided that notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the President may refer any Petition in which he has to give a final decision to the Supreme Court for a judicial opinion.
The Supreme Court shall have supervisory jurisdiction over all other Courts in Sierra Leone and over any adjudicating authority; and in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction shall have power to issue such directions, orders or writs including writs of habeas corpus, orders of certiorari, mandamus and prohibition as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory powers.
A single Justice of the Supreme Court acting in its criminal jurisdiction, and three Justices of the Supreme Court acting in its civil jurisdiction may exercise any power vested in the Supreme Court not involving the decision of a cause or matter before the Supreme Court save that—
A single Justice of the Court of Appeal may exercise any power vested in the Court of Appeal not involving the decision of any cause or matter before the Court of Appeal save that—
The High Court of Justice shall have supervisory jurisdiction over all inferior and traditional Courts in Sierra Leone and any adjudicating authority, and in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction shall have power to issue such directions, writs and orders, including writs of habeas corpus, and orders of certiorari, mandamus and prohibition as it may consider appropriate for the purposes of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its supervisory powers.
those functions shall be performed by the most senior for the time being of the Justices of the Supreme Court.
A Judge of the Superior Court of Judicature shall, before assuming the functions of his office, take and subscribe before—
Provided that the Commission may, with the approval of the President and subject to such conditions as it may think fit, delegate any of its powers under this section, by direction in writing to any of its members, or to any Judge of the High Court, or to the holder of any office to which this section applies, or, in the case of a power relating to an office connected with the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court, to any Justice of either of those Courts.
Any fees, fines or other moneys taken by the Courts shall form part of the Consolidated Fund.
the Court shall stay the proceedings and refer the question to the Supreme Court for determination.
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the Rules of Court Committee shall, by constitutional instrument, make rules regulating the practice and procedure of all Commissions of Inquiry.
Provided that a member of the Public Service Commission shall retire at the age of sixty- five years.
Provided that the power of transfer vested in the Public Service Commission under subsection (5) may be exercised in the case of persons holding any of the offices specified in this subsection where such persons express their consent in writing to such transfer.
Provided that the appointment to these offices shall be subject to the approval of Parliament.
unless by such removal he ceases to be a member of the Public Service.
Provided that in the case of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker his resignation from office shall be addressed to Parliament and in the case of a Member of Parliament his resignation from Parliament shall be addressed to the Speaker.
The question whether—
shall not be inquired into in any Court.
No person shall raise any armed force except by or under the authority of an Act of Parliament.
“Commission of Inquiry” includes a committee of inquiry;
“constitutional instrument” means an instrument made under a power conferred in that behalf by this Constitution;
“Court” means any court of law in Sierra Leone including a court martial;
“law” includes—
“Local Court” means a Court established by or under the Local Courts Act, 1963;
“Oath” includes an affirmation;
“The President” means the President of the Republic;
“Public Emergency” includes any period during which
“public office” includes an office the emoluments attaching to which are paid directly from the Consolidated Fund or directly out of moneys provided by Parliament;
“public officer” means a person holding or acting in a public office;
“public service” means, subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4), service of the Government of Sierra Leone in a civil capacity and includes such service in respect of the Government existing in Sierra Leone prior to the twenty-seventh day of April, 1961;
“Session” means the sittings of Parliament when it first meets after the commencement of this Constitution or after the prorogation or dissolution of Parliament at any time and ending when Parliament is prorogued or dissolved without having been prorogued;
“Sierra Leone” means the territory more particularly described in the First Schedule;
“Statutory Instrument” means any proclamation, regulation, order, rule or other instrument (not being an Act of Parliament) having the force of law;
“the Sierra Leone Police” means the Police Force established under the Police Act, 1964;
“sitting” means a period during which Parliament is sitting continuously without adjournment including any period during which Parliament is in committee.
Provided that—
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall apply to the power to issue a certificate conferred by paragraph (b) of subsection (6) of section 50 of this Constitution.
The provisions of any Consequential Provisions Act made under this Constitution and of any Act relating to citizenship shall not be amended, repealed, re-enacted or replaced unless the Bill incorporating such amendments, repeal, re-enactment or replacement is supported at the final vote thereupon by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the Members of Parliament.
In this Chapter “The existing Constitution” refers to the Constitution of Sierra Leone, 1978.
The transitional provisions of this Constitution shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Constitution or any other law.
In this Chapter, the expression “existing law” means any Act, rule, regulation, order or other such instrument made in pursuance of, or continuing in operation under, the existing Constitution and having effect as part of the laws of Sierra Leone or of any part thereof immediately before the commencement of this Constitution or any Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom or Order of Her Majesty in Council so having effect and may be construed with such modifications, adaptations qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring it into conformity with this Constitution as if it had been under this Constitution.
Provided that—
Provided that the period served after the commencement of this Constitution shall not count as a term or part of a term for the purposes of subsection (1) of section 46.
Provided that, where the hearing of a disciplinary proceeding has begun but has not been completed immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, the continued hearing shall not be held before any person unless the hearing that has already taken place was also held before him; and where, by virtue of this provision, the hearing cannot be continued it shall be recommenced.
Where any matter or thing has been commenced before the coming into force of this Constitution by any person or authority having power in that behalf under the existing law, that matter or thing may be carried on and completed by the person or authority having power in that behalf on or after such commencement and it shall not be necessary for any such person or authority to commence any such matter or thing de novo.
Subject to the provisions of sections 183 and 184 legal proceedings pending immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution before any Court, including civil proceedings by or against the Government, shall not be affected by the coming into force of this Constitution and may be continued accordingly.
The Public Funds known as the Consolidated Fund and the Contingencies Fund established by the existing Constitution shall respectively continue in being as the Consolidated Fund and the Contingencies Fund established respectively by sections 111 and 116 of this Constitution.
Every payment required or authorised to be made out of a Public Fund under any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution is hereby charged on that Fund.
The Public Seal, the seals of the High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court, together with any duplicates thereof and any other official seal, as well as any prescribed forms in use under any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution may be employed on and after that date by the corresponding authorities under any law in force at the said commencement and contained in the existing law.
The Sierra Leone Police Force established by the Police Act, 1964 and in being immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in being thereafter and be deemed to be the Police Force of the Republic of Sierra Leone and any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the said Police Force shall have effect accordingly.
The Republic of Sierra Leone Military Forces established by the Sierra Leone Military Forces Act, 1961 in being immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue in being thereafter and be deemed to be the Military Forces of the Republic of Sierra Leone, and any law in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the said Military Forces shall have effect accordingly.
The Constitution of Sierra Leone, 1978 is hereby repealed in so far as it affects the laws of Sierra Leone:
Provided that notwithstanding such repeal, all laws made by virtue of any authority therein contained shall remain in full force and effect to the same extent as if that Constitution had not been repealed.
The President may within a period of three years from the coming into force of this Constitution cause these provisions to be reprinted and published without the transitional provisions in this Constitution.
This Act shall come into operation on the 1st day of October, 1991, following the issuance of a certificate by the Speaker in the form set out in the Fourth Schedule that the provisions of section 55 of the existing Constitution have been complied with.
The area in West Africa lying between the sixth and tenth degrees of north latitude and the tenth and fourteenth degrees of west longitude and bounded on the north by the boundary line delimited under the provisions of the Anglo-French Convention dated the twenty-eight day of June, 1882, the Anglo-French Agreement dated the twenty-first day of January, 1895, and the notes exchanged between His Britannic Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and the Ambassador of the French Republic, and dated the sixth day of July, 1911, and on the South by the Anglo-Liberian boundary line delimited under the provisions of the Anglo-Liberian Conventions dated the eleventh day of November, 1885 and the twenty-first day of January, 1911.
“I                             do hereby (in the name of God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will at all times well and truly discharge the duties of the office of the President of the Republic of Sierra Leone according to law, that I will preserve, support, uphold, maintain and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Sierra Leone as by law established, and that I will do right to all manner of people according to law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. (So help me God.)
Oath of the Vice-President, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, Secretary to the President, Secretary to the Cabinet, Solicitor-General, Director of Public Prosecutions, Members of the Electoral Commission, the Speaker, Members of Parliament, Auditor-General, Members of the Public Service Commission, The Chief Justice and Judges of the Superior Court of Judicature, Members of the Judicial and Legal Service Commission, Members of the Police Council, Members of the Defence Council.
“I                        do hereby (in the name of God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully and truly discharge the duties of the office of                               of the Republic of Sierra Leone, and that I will support, uphold and maintain the Constitution of Sierra Leone as by law established. (So help me God.)
OATH OF THE SPEAKER
“I                             do hereby (in the name of God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Sierra Leone as by law established; that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as Speaker of Parliament, and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution of Sierra Leone and uphold the Laws and customs of Parliament without fear or favour, affection or ill-will. (So help me God.)
OATH OF MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
“I                           having been elected a Member of Parliament do hereby (in the name of God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Sierra Leone as by law established, that I will uphold and defend the Constitution of Sierra Leone, and that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge the duties of a Member of Parliament. (So help me God.)
THE JUDICIAL OATH
“I                                  do hereby (in the name of God swear) (solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully and truly discharge the duties of the office of                                     and that I will support and uphold the Constitution of Sierra Leone as by Law established, and that I will do right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of Sierra Leone without fear or favour affection or ill-will. (So help me God.)
I WILLIAM NIAKA STEPHEN CONTEH, Officer of the Order of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Speaker of the Parliament of Sierra Leone, do hereby certify that a Bill entitled “THE CONSTITUTION OF SIERRA LEONE, 1991” was first introduced by the Honourable ABDULAI OSMAN CONTEH, Officer of the Order of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Attorney-General and Minister of Justice of Sierra Leone in the Fifth Session of the Third Parliament of Sierra Leone on the 4th day of June, 1991, then passed the First Reading, the Second Reading and the Committee Stage (with certain amendments made thereto) and that on the 1st day of July, 1991 the said Honourable ABDULAI OSMAN CONTEH, Officer of the Order of the Republic of Sierra Leone, Attorney-General and Minister of Justice of Sierra Leone, reported to the House that the Bill entitled “THE CONSTITUTION OF SIERRA LEONE, 1991” passed the House with certain amendments.
I further certify that on the 3rd day of August, 1991, the said Bill entitled “THE CONSTITUTION OF SIERRA LEONE, 1991” in accordance with the provisions of subsection (3) of Section 55 of the Constitution of Sierra Leone, 1978 (Act No. 12 of 1978), has been submitted to and been approved at a Referendum conducted on the 23rd, 26th, 28th and 30th days of August, 1991 and been approved with the majority required under sub-section (4) of Section 55 of the Constitution of Sierra Leone, 1978.
I further certify that all the appropriate provisions of Section 55 of the Constitution of Sierra Leone, 1978 have been complied with and that the said Bill entitled “THE CONSTITUTION OF SIERRA LEONE, 1991” may therefore be submitted to His Excellency the President for his assent and signature.
GIVEN under my hand this 3rd day of September, 1991. W. N. S. CONTEH, Speaker.
Passed in Parliament this 1st day of July, in the year of our Lord one thousand nine hundred and ninety-one. M. T. BETTS-PRIDDY, Acting Clerk of Parliament.
