This Constitution may be cited as the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
"Civil List" means the provision made under Article 22J for the maintenance of the President;
"citizen of Singapore" means any person who, under the provisions of this Constitution, has the status of a citizen of Singapore;
"commencement", used with reference to this Constitution, means 9th August 1965;
"Consolidated Fund" means the Consolidated Fund established by this Constitution;
"Council of Presidential Advisers" means the Council of Presidential Advisers constituted under Part VA;
"existing law" means any law having effect as part of the law of Singapore immediately before the commencement of this Constitution;
"Government" means the Government of Singapore;
"Judge of the Supreme Court" means the Chief Justice, a Judge of Appeal or a Judge of the High Court;
"law" includes written law and any legislation of the United Kingdom or other enactment or instrument whatsoever which is in operation in Singapore and the common law in so far as it is in operation in Singapore and any custom or usage having the force of law in Singapore;
"Legal Service Commission" means the Legal Service Commission constituted under this Constitution;
"Legislature" means the Legislature of Singapore;
"Minister" means a Minister appointed under this Constitution;
"office of profit" means, subject to clause (5), any whole time office in the public service;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Singapore;
"President" means the President of Singapore elected under this Constitution and includes any person for the time being exercising the functions of the office of President;
"Presidential Elections Committee" means the Presidential Elections Committee constituted under Article 18;
"Prime Minister" means the Prime Minister of Singapore appointed under this Constitution;
"public office" means, subject to clause (5), an office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means the holder of any public office;
"public seal" means the public seal of Singapore;
"public service" means service under the Government;
"Public Service Commission" means the Public Service Commission constituted under this Constitution;
"register of electors" means any register of electors prepared under the provisions of any written law for the time being in force relating to Parliamentary elections;
"remuneration", in respect of any public officer, means only the emoluments of that officer, the whole or any part of which count for pension or gratuity in accordance with the provisions of any law relating to the grant of pensions or gratuities in respect of the public service;
"reserves", in relation to the Government, a statutory board or Government company, means the excess of assets over liabilities of the Government, statutory board or Government company, as the case may be;
"session" means the sittings of Parliament commencing when it first meets after being constituted, or after its prorogation or dissolution at any time, and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"Singapore" means the Republic of Singapore;
"sitting" means a period during which Parliament is sitting continuously without adjournment, including any period during which Parliament is in committee;
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean, respectively, the Speaker and a Deputy Speaker of Parliament;
"term of office", in relation to the Government, means the period—
"terms of service", in respect of any officer, includes the remuneration to which that officer is entitled by virtue of his office, and any pension, gratuity or other like allowance payable to or in respect of that officer;
"written law" means this Constitution and all Acts and Ordinances and subsidiary legislation for the time being in force in Singapore.
Provided that, in the case of a resignation that is required to be addressed to the Speaker, the resignation shall, if the office of Speaker is vacant or the Speaker is absent from Singapore, be deemed to have effect from the time that it is received by a Deputy Speaker on behalf of the Speaker.
*Offices of Consul-General and Consul have been prescribed by the President — See G.N. No. S 212/72
Singapore shall be a sovereign republic to be known as the Republic of Singapore.
This Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Singapore and any law enacted by the Legislature after the commencement of this Constitution which is inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
unless such surrender, transfer or relinquishment has been supported, at a national referendum, by not less than two-thirds of the total number of votes cast by the electors registered under the Parliamentary Elections Act (Cap. 218).
"Singapore Police Force" means the Singapore Police Force and the Special Constabulary established under the Police Force Act (Cap. 235) and any Auxiliary Police Force created in accordance with Part IX of that Act, and includes the Vigilante Corps established under the Vigilante Corps Act (Cap. 343) and such other force as the President may, by notification in the Gazette, declare to be a police force for the purposes of this Article.
Without in any way derogating from the force and effect of Article 6, nothing in that Article shall be construed as precluding Singapore or any association, body or organisation therein from—
by reason of such law being inconsistent with clauses (3) and (4), and, in particular, nothing in this Article shall affect the validity or operation of any such law before 10th March 1978.
whichever is earlier, as assessed solely on the basis of events occurring on or before the date of the writ of election;
“company” means a company limited by shares and incorporated or registered in Singapore under the general law relating to companies;
“period” means continuous period.
“person belonging to the Chinese community” means any person who considers himself to be a member of the Chinese community and who is generally accepted as a member of the Chinese community by that community;
“person belonging to the Malay community” means any person, whether of the Malay race or otherwise, who considers himself to be a member of the Malay community and who is generally accepted as a member of the Malay community by that community;
“person belonging to the Indian or other minority communities” means any person of Indian origin who considers himself to be a member of the Indian community and who is generally accepted as a member of the Indian community by that community, or any person who belongs to any minority community other than the Malay or Indian community;
“term of office” includes an uncompleted term of office.
as the case may be.
as the case may be.
*Article 5A, 5B, and 5C are not in operation.
and if the President does not approve the revised budget, the statutory board may during that financial year incur total expenditure not exceeding the amount provided in the approved budget of the statutory board for the preceding financial year; and the budget for the preceding financial year shall have effect as the approved budget for that financial year.
shall not be taken into account in determining whether the reserves accumulated by the transferor board before the current term of office of the Government are likely to be or have been drawn on if—
and if the President does not approve the revised budget, the Government company may during that financial year incur a total expenditure not exceeding the amount provided in the approved budget of the Government company for the preceding financial year; and the budget for the preceding financial year shall have effect as the approved budget for that financial year.
shall not be taken into account in determining whether the reserves accumulated by the transferor company before the current term of office of the Government are likely to be or have been drawn on if—
The President, acting in his discretion, may withhold his assent to any Bill passed by Parliament which provides, directly or indirectly, for varying, changing or increasing the powers of the Central Provident Fund Board to invest the moneys belonging to the Central Provident Fund.
to furnish any information referred to in clause (1) concerning the reserves of the Government, the statutory board or Government company, as the case may be, and the Minister, member, officer or director concerned shall be under a duty to provide the information.
Notwithstanding that the Prime Minister has refused to give his consent to the Director of the Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau to make any inquiries or to carry out any investigations into any information received by the Director touching upon the conduct of any person or any allegation or complaint made against any person, the Director may make such inquiries or carry out investigations into such information, allegation or complaint if the President, acting in his discretion, concurs therewith.
The President, acting in his discretion, may cancel, vary, confirm or refuse to confirm a restraining order made under the Maintenance of Religious Harmony Act (Cap. 167A) where the advice of the Cabinet is contrary to the recommendation of the Presidential Council for Religious Harmony.
and setting out full particulars of the allegations made and seeking an inquiry and report thereon.
Provided that, if an appointment is made while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Member of the last Parliament may be appointed but shall not continue to hold office after the first sitting of the next Parliament unless he is a Member thereof.
Provided that, before declaring the office of Prime Minister vacant under this paragraph, the President shall inform the Prime Minister that he is satisfied as aforesaid, and, if the Prime Minister so requests, the President may dissolve Parliament instead of making such a declaration.
The Prime Minister and every other Minister shall, before entering on the duties of his office, take and subscribe before the President the Oath of Allegiance and the appropriate Oath for the due execution of his office in the forms set out in the First Schedule.
Any proceedings in the Cabinet shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled to do so sat or voted therein or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
Provided that, if an appointment is made while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Member of the last Parliament may be appointed a Parliamentary Secretary but shall not continue to hold office after the first sitting of the next Parliament unless he is a Member thereof.
The President, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may grant leave of absence from his duties to the Prime Minister, to any other Minister and to any Parliamentary Secretary.
A member of the Cabinet or Parliamentary Secretary shall not hold any office of profit and shall not actively engage in any commercial enterprise.
Provided that—
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Council" means the Council of Presidential Advisers constituted under Article 37B;
"member" means a member of the Council and includes the Chairman and any alternate member appointed under Article 37C.
an alternate member to act in place of that member shall be selected from among the persons appointed under clause (2)—
A person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member if he—
Provided that where the conviction is by a court in a foreign country, the person shall not be so disqualified unless the offence is also one which, had it been committed in Singapore, would have been punishable by a court of law in Singapore.
It shall be the function of the Council to advise and make recommendations to the President on any matter referred to the Council by the President under this Constitution
Without limiting Article 37IA, the President must immediately refer to the Council for its recommendation —
as the case may be.
In a case referred to the Council under Article 37IB, the Council’s recommendation to the President must state —
cannot be overruled unless the chairman of the entity or the chairman of the board of directors of the entity (as the case may be) has made a request to the Cabinet for a resolution under clause (1) to be moved with respect to the refusal or the decision.
as the case may be.
*Articles 5A, 5B and 5C are not in operation.
The Council shall have power to appoint a Secretary to the Council and such other officers as may be required to enable the Council to carry out its functions.
The legislative power of Singapore shall be vested in the Legislature which shall consist of the President and Parliament.
for the purpose of any election in group representation constituencies;
"group" means a group of not less than 3 but not more than 6 candidates nominated for any election in any group representation constituency;
"person belonging to the Malay community" means any person, whether of the Malay race or otherwise, who considers himself to be a member of the Malay community and who is generally accepted as a member of the Malay community by that community;
"person belonging to the Indian or other minority communities" means any person of Indian origin who considers himself to be a member of the Indian community and who is generally accepted as a member of the Indian community by that community, or any person who belongs to any minority community other than the Malay or Indian community.
Provided that a person who is not a Member of Parliament shall not be elected as Speaker if, under any of the provisions of this Constitution, he is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament.
The Speaker shall be paid such salary as Parliament may from time to time determine, and that salary, which is hereby charged on the Consolidated Fund, shall not be diminished during his continuance in office.
Provided that a person who is not a Member of Parliament shall not be elected as Deputy Speaker if, under any of the provisions of this Constitution, he is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament.
The functions conferred by this Constitution upon the Speaker shall, if there is no person holding the office of Speaker or if the Speaker is absent from a sitting of Parliament or is otherwise unable to perform those functions, be performed by a Deputy Speaker, or if there be no Deputy Speaker or if he is likewise absent or unable to perform those functions, by some other person to be elected by Parliament for the purpose.
Provided that where the conviction is by a court of law in Malaysia, the person shall not be so disqualified unless the offence is also one which, had it been committed in Singapore, would have been punishable by a court of law in Singapore;
and it is open to the Member to appeal against the decision (either with the leave of the court or other authority or without such leave), the Member shall immediately cease to be entitled to sit or vote in Parliament or any committee thereof but, subject to clauses (6) and (7), he shall not vacate his seat until the end of a period of 180 days beginning with the date of the adjudication, declaration or conviction, as the case may be.
A person shall not be at the same time a Member of Parliament for more than one constituency.
Any question whether—
shall be determined by Parliament whose decision shall be final:
Provided that this Article shall not be taken to prevent the practice of Parliament postponing a decision in order to allow for the taking or determination of any proceedings that may affect the decision (including proceedings for the removal of the disqualification).
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may, from time to time, make, amend and revoke Standing Orders for the regulation and orderly conduct of its own proceedings and the despatch of business.
Until the Legislature otherwise provides, all debates and discussions in Parliament shall be conducted in Malay, English, Mandarin or Tamil.
The Speaker shall preside at each sitting of Parliament.
Parliament shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy among the Members thereof, including any vacancy not filled when Parliament is first constituted or is reconstituted at any time; and any proceedings therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled to do so sat or voted in Parliament or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
If objection is taken by any Member present that there are present (besides the Speaker or other Member presiding) fewer than one-quarter of the total number of Members and, after such interval as may be prescribed in the Standing Orders of Parliament, the Speaker or other Member presiding ascertains that the number of Members present is still less than one-quarter of the total number of Members, he shall thereupon adjourn Parliament.
being provision as respects which the Minister responsible for finance signifies that it goes beyond what is incidental only and not of a substantial nature having regard to the purposes of the Bill or amendment, shall not be introduced or moved except on the recommendation of the President signified by a Minister.
In every Bill presented for assent, the words of enactment shall be as follows:
"Be it enacted by the President with the advice and consent of the Parliament of Singapore, as follows:".
No Member of Parliament shall be permitted to take part in the proceedings thereof (other than proceedings necessary for the purpose of this Article) until he has taken and subscribed before Parliament the Oath of Allegiance in the form set out in the First Schedule:
Provided that the election of a Speaker may take place before the Members of Parliament have taken and subscribed such Oath.
The President may address Parliament and may send messages thereto.
It shall be lawful for the Legislature by law to determine and regulate the privileges, immunities or powers of Parliament.
There shall be a general election at such time, within 3 months after every dissolution of Parliament, as the President shall, by Proclamation in the Gazette, appoint.
The Legislature may by law make provision for the remuneration of Members of Parliament.
In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires—
"Chairman" means the Chairman of the Council;
"Council" means the Presidential Council for Minority Rights established under Article 69;
"differentiating measure" means any measure which is, or is likely in its practical application to be, disadvantageous to persons of any racial or religious community and not equally disadvantageous to persons of other such communities, either directly by prejudicing persons of that community or indirectly by giving advantage to persons of another community;
"member" means a member of the Council and includes the Chairman;
"Money Bill" means a Bill which contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters:
"sitting day" means any date on which Parliament meets.
Whenever a member informs the Chairman that he is or will be incapable, for a period of 3 months or more, of taking part in the proceedings of the Council by reason of illness, absence or other cause, the Chairman shall convey the information to the President who may, if he, acting in his discretion, concurs with the advice of the Cabinet, appoint a person to serve as a member for that period.
No person shall be qualified to be appointed as a member unless he—
A person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member who—
Provided that where the conviction is by a court of law in Malaysia, the person shall not be so disqualified unless the offence is also one which, had it been committed in Singapore, would have been punishable by a court of law in Singapore; or
A member shall vacate his seat in the Council—
Before any person who has been appointed Chairman or a member enters upon the duties of his office, he shall take and subscribe before a Judge of the Supreme Court the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of Secrecy in the forms set out respectively in paragraphs 2 and 7 in the First Schedule.
It shall be the particular function of the Council to draw attention to any Bill or to any subsidiary legislation if that Bill or subsidiary legislation is, in the opinion of the Council, a differentiating measure.
the appropriate Minister shall revoke such provision and cause a notice of revocation to be published in the Gazette.
The proceedings of the Council shall be conducted in private and the Council shall not be entitled to hear objectors or examine witnesses in regard to any Bill or law which is being considered by the Council in pursuance of the provisions of this Part.
In reporting the opinion of the Council under the provisions of this Part, the Council shall state—
Subject to Article 83 (1), the Council shall not be disqualified for the transaction of business by reason of any vacancy among the members thereof; and any proceedings therein shall be valid notwithstanding that some person who was not entitled to do so took part in those proceedings.
Any Minister, Minister of State or Parliamentary Secretary specially authorised by the Prime Minister for this purpose shall be entitled to attend and take part in the proceedings of the Council as if he were a member but shall not have the right to vote in the Council.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Council may make rules with respect to the regulation and conduct of its proceedings and the despatch of its business but no such rules shall have effect until they have been approved by the President.
The Council shall have power to appoint a Secretary to the Council and such other officers as may be required to enable the Council to carry out its functions under this Part.
The President may make rules for the conduct of business between the Council and Parliament and between the Council and any authority empowered to make subsidiary legislation, and generally for carrying out the purposes of this Part.
The judicial power of Singapore shall be vested in a Supreme Court and in such subordinate courts as may be provided by any written law for the time being in force.
A person is qualified for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court if he has for an aggregate period of not less than 10 years been a qualified person within the meaning of section 2 of the Legal Profession Act (Cap. 161) or a member of the Singapore Legal Service, or both.
The conduct of a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Judicial Commissioner, a Senior Judge or an International Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be discussed in Parliament except on a substantive motion of which notice has been given by not less than one-quarter of the total number of the Members of Parliament.
In this Part, "office", in relation to a Judge of the Supreme Court, means the office as Chief Justice, Judge of Appeal or Judge of the High Court, as the case may be.
Except for the purposes of Articles 112, 114 and 115, and except where the context otherwise requires, in the interpretation of this Part—
and "public officer" shall be construed accordingly.
Except as expressly provided by this Constitution, every person who is a member of the public service shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
Provided that a member, other than the Chairman, may be appointed to hold office for any shorter period of not less than 3 years.
"transfer" does not include transfer without a change of rank within a department of the Government.
Repealed by Act 11/98.
Repealed by Act 11/98.
Repealed by Act 11/98.
and any power of appointment specified in the order as to be exercised by a personnel board shall not include a power to dismiss any person so appointed.
except that where the Chief Justice, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission or the Prime Minister, as the case may be, nominates 2 persons, one of whom must be a person who has for an aggregate period of not less than 10 years been a qualified person within the meaning of section 2 (1) of the Legal Profession Act (Cap. 161).
and any power of appointment specified in the order as to be exercised by a personnel board shall not include a power to dismiss any person so appointed.
that award shall be made and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission or the Legal Service Commission, as the case may be, concurs in the refusal to grant the award or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend it.
Omitted (as the Article has had its effect).
Parliament may by law provide for the exercise of other functions by the Public Service Commission.
The Public Service Commission and the Legal Service Commission shall each make an annual report on its activities to the President and a copy of every such report shall be presented to Parliament.
Provided that the Government may exempt any applicant from compliance with this paragraph—
Provided that the Government may exempt an applicant who has attained the age of 45 years or who is deaf or dumb from compliance with this paragraph.
cause such child to be registered as a citizen of Singapore on application being made therefor in the prescribed manner by the parent or guardian of such child.
Subject to Article 126, a person registered as a citizen of Singapore under Article 123 or 124 shall be a citizen of Singapore from the date on which he is so registered.
Provided that a person shall not be deprived of his citizenship under this clause by reason of anything done before the commencement of this Constitution notwithstanding that he was at the time a citizen of Singapore.
Where a person has—
the Government may, by order, deprive of his citizenship any child of that person under the age of 21 years who has been registered as a citizen of Singapore pursuant to this Constitution and was so registered as being the child of that person or of that person's wife or husband.
Renunciation or deprivation of citizenship of Singapore shall not discharge a person from liability in respect of anything done or omitted to be done before he ceased to be a citizen of Singapore.
the Government may, by order, cancel the enrolment.
Where a person who was a citizen of Singapore had renounced his citizenship of Malaysia or been deprived of his citizenship of Malaysia by the government of Malaysia before the commencement of this Constitution, such person shall be deemed to have renounced or been deprived of his citizenship of Singapore under this Constitution and to have ceased to be a citizen of Singapore.
Upon application made in that behalf in the prescribed manner, the Government may grant in the form prescribed a certificate of citizenship to a person with respect to whose citizenship a doubt exists, whether of fact or of law:
Provided that where the Government is satisfied that such a certificate was obtained in circumstances set out in Article 132 (1) (a) or (b), the Government may, by order, cancel such certificate.
Until the Legislature otherwise provides by law, the supplementary provisions contained in the Third Schedule shall have effect for the purposes of this Part.
"financial year" means a period of 12 months ending on 31st March in any year.
any reference in this Part to the reserves not accumulated by the Government during its current term of office shall exclude those reserves equal to the amount so certified.
shall for the purposes of this Part accrete and be deemed to form part of the past reserves of the Government with effect from the date of the receipt thereof.
shall accrete and be deemed to form part of the past reserves of the Government with effect from the date of the certificate relating to that financial year made under clause (3) or, if no such certificate is made or earlier made, from the date the accounts and statements referred to in Article 147 (5) for that financial year are presented to the President.
after deducting all expenses arising from or incidental to investing and managing those reserves (other than costs of purchasing or disposing of or converting investments) and any interest, sinking fund charges and borrowing charges;
"net investment income of a financial year that is derived from the past reserves" means the share of the net investment income of the financial year that is attributable to the past reserves;
"past reserves of the Government" means the reserves not accumulated by the Government during its current term of office, including accretions thereto deemed under clauses (1C) and (2) to be part thereof, but less such amount that is certified under clause (1A)( b) or such amount adjusted pro-rata based on the period a financial year falls partially within any current term of office of the Government;
"real rate of return" means an annual percentage of return on investment of relevant assets of the Government adjusted for changes in prices due to inflation or deflation and after deducting all expenses arising from or incidental to investing and managing the relevant assets;
"realised capital gains" , in relation to any relevant assets, means all proceeds realised from the disposition of the relevant assets less all costs and expenses arising from or incidental to the disposition, purchase or conversion of the relevant assets, and includes any realised capital losses;
"relevant assets" means all of the following:
less the following liabilities:
No tax or rate shall be levied by, or for the purposes of, Singapore except by or under the authority of law.
There shall be in and for Singapore a Consolidated Fund into which, subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force in Singapore, shall be paid all revenues of Singapore not allocated to specific purposes by any written law.
and, after the accounts and statements referred to in this clause have been audited, present to the President those audited accounts and statements together with another statement stating whether the audited accounts and statements referred to in this clause show any drawing on or likelihood of drawing on the reserves of the Government which were not accumulated by the Government during its current term of office.
supplementary estimates (or, as the case may be, statements of excess) shall be prepared by the Minister responsible for finance and, when approved by the Cabinet, shall be presented to and voted on by Parliament; in respect of all supplementary expenditure so voted, the Minister responsible for finance may, at any time before the end of the financial year, introduce into Parliament a Supplementary Supply Bill containing, under appropriate heads, the estimated sums so voted and shall, as soon as possible after the end of each financial year, introduce into Parliament a Final Supply Bill containing any such sums which have not yet been included in any Supply Bill.
Provided that—
Provided that the expenditure so authorised for any service or purpose shall not exceed one-quarter of the amount voted for that service or purpose in the Supply law for the preceding financial year.
Where the President considers that certain liabilities of the Government, though not requiring his approval, are likely to draw on the reserves of the Government which were not accumulated by the Government during its current term of office, he shall state his opinion in writing to the Prime Minister and shall cause the opinion to be published in the Gazette.
shall not be taken into account in determining whether the reserves accumulated by the Government before its current term of office are likely to be or have been drawn on if—
any provision of that law designed to stop or prevent that action or any amendment to that law or any provision in any law enacted under clause (3) is valid notwithstanding that it is inconsistent with Article 9, 11, 12, 13 or 14, or would, apart from this Article, be outside the legislative power of Parliament.
The Legislature shall by law make provision for regulating Muslim religious affairs and for constituting a Council to advise the President in matters relating to the Muslim religion.
Provided that—
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, all persons of whatever race in the same grade of the service of the Government shall, subject to the terms and conditions of their employment, be treated impartially.
The President, acting in his discretion, may by order published in the Gazette exempt any transaction or class of transactions, from the application of Article 144.
Omitted.
The Standing Orders of the Legislative Assembly established by the Singapore (Constitution) Order in Council 1958 (S.I. 1958 No. 1956) which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, subject to amendment or revocation under Article 52, be the Standing Orders of Parliament.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, every person who immediately before the commencement of this Constitution holds a public office shall on its commencement continue to hold the like office in the public service.
Subject to this Article, all property and assets which immediately before the commencement of this Constitution were vested in the State of Singapore shall vest in the Republic of Singapore.
Omitted.
Subject to this Article, all existing laws shall continue in force on and after the commencement of this Constitution and all laws which have not been brought into force by the date of the commencement of this Constitution may, subject as aforesaid, be brought into force on or after its commencement, but all such laws shall, subject to this Article, be construed as from the commencement of this Constitution with such modifications, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution.
“existing member” means a member on the date immediately before the appointed date;
“member” means a member of the Council of Presidential Advisers.
I, ......................................................................................................................................, having been elected President of the Republic of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, and without regard to any previous affiliation with any political party, and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
I, ...................................................................................................................................., Chairman of the Council of Presidential Advisers/Speaker of Parliament, being required by/having been appointed under the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore to exercise the functions of the office of President, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, and that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
I, ......................................................................................................, having been appointed to the office of ..........................................................................................., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
I, ..................................................................................................................., having been elected as a Member of the Parliament of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my duties as such to the best of my ability, that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of Singapore, and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
I, ..........................................................., being chosen and appointed as Prime Minister of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will at all times faithfully discharge my duties as Prime Minister according to law, and to the best of my knowledge and ability, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
I, ..........................................................., being chosen and appointed as Minister/Parliamentary Secretary of Singapore, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will at all times faithfully discharge my duties as Minister/Parliamentary Secretary according to law, and to the best of my knowledge and ability, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.
I, .................................................................................................., having been appointed to be Chairman/a Member of the Public Service Commission do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will freely and without fear or favour, affection or ill-will, give my counsel and advice in connection with all matters that may be referred to the Public Service Commission and that I will not, directly or indirectly, reveal any such matters to any unauthorised person or otherwise than in the course of duty.
I, ................................................................................................................., having been appointed to the office of ................................................................................................., do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my judicial duties, and I will do right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of the Republic of Singapore without fear or favour, affection or ill-will to the best of my ability, and will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Singapore.
I, ..................................................................................................., having been appointed to the office of ......................................................................, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully discharge my judicial duties, and I will do right to all manner of people after the laws and usages of the Republic of Singapore without fear or favour, affection or ill-will to the best of my ability.
I, ................................................................................................................., having been appointed to be Chairman/a Member of the Presidential Council for Minority Rights, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not, directly or indirectly, reveal any matter considered in the Presidential Council for Minority Rights to any unauthorised person or otherwise than in the course of duty.
I, ................................................................................................................., having been appointed to be Chairman/a Member of the Council of Presidential Advisers do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not, directly or indirectly, reveal any matter considered in the Council to any unauthorised person or otherwise than in the course of duty.
I, ................................................................................................, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will not exercise the rights, powers and privileges to which I may be entitled by reason of any foreign nationality or citizenship, and that I absolutely and entirely renounce all loyalty to any foreign Sovereign or State or Country and, I, .............................................................................................., do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Singapore, and that I will observe the laws and be a true, loyal and faithful citizen of Singapore.
The functions of the Government under Part X shall be exercised by such Minister as the President may, from time to time, direct and references in this Schedule to the Minister shall be construed accordingly.
A decision of the Government under Part X shall not be subject to appeal or review in any court.
The Minister may delegate to any public officer of the Government any of his functions under Part X or under this Schedule relating to citizenship by registration and enrolment and the keeping of registers and, in relation to orders under clauses (1), (2), (3) (b), (6) and (7) of Article 129 or Article 132, any of his functions under Article 133 prior to determining whether to make such an order; but any person aggrieved by the decision of a public officer to whom the functions of the Minister are so delegated may appeal to the Minister.
The Minister may make rules and prescribe forms for the purpose of the exercise of his functions under Part X and of this Schedule and, in particular, may provide for the circumstances (including cases of persons ordinarily resident outside Singapore) under which a committee of inquiry under Article 133 is to proceed by way of written representations.
The power of the Government under Articles 122 and 141 to allow a longer period for the registration of a birth may be exercised either before or after the registration has been effected.
Any notice to be given by the Minister to any person under Article 133 (1) may be sent to that person at his last known address or, in the case of a person under the age of 18 years (not being a married woman) to his parent or guardian at the last known address of the parent or guardian; and if an address at which the notice may be sent to any person under this paragraph is not known and cannot after reasonable inquiry be ascertained, the notice may be given by publication in the Gazette.
It shall be the duty of the Minister to compile and maintain—
*Article 56 of the Constitution of the State of Singapore (G.N. Sp. No. S 1/63) was repealed by G.N. No. S 50/66, with effect from 9th August 1965.
If the Minister has reason to believe that an error appears in any register compiled under section 7, he shall, after giving notice to the persons concerned and after considering such representations from him as he may choose to make, make such alteration to the register as appears to the Minister to be necessary to correct the error.
Subject to section 8, the said register shall be conclusive evidence of the matters therein contained.
*Article 56 of the Constitution of the State of Singapore (G.N. Sp. No. S 1/63) was repealed by G.N. No. S 50/66, with effect from 9th August 1965.
For the purposes of Part X, a person born on board a registered ship or aircraft, or on board an unregistered ship or aircraft of the government of any country, shall be deemed to have been born in the place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country.
Any new born child found exposed in Singapore of unknown and unascertainable parentage shall, until the contrary is proved, be deemed to be a citizen of Singapore by birth; and the date of finding shall be taken to be the date of birth of such child.
For the purposes of Part X, a person is to be treated as having at birth any citizenship which he acquires within one year afterwards by virtue of any provision corresponding to the proviso to Article 122 (1) or otherwise.
In calculating for the purposes of Part X, a period of residence in Singapore—
may be treated as residence in Singapore and a person shall be deemed to be resident in Singapore on a particular day if he had been resident in Singapore before that day and that day is included in any such period of absence as aforesaid.
In calculating for the purposes of Part X any period of residence in Singapore, no account shall be taken—
