We, the Slovak nation,
bearing in mind the political and cultural heritage of our ancestors and the centuries of experience from the struggles for national existence and our own statehood,
mindful of the spiritual heritage of Cyril and Methodius and the historical legacy of Great Moravia,
recognizing the natural right of nations to self-determination,
together with members of national minorities and ethnic groups living on the territory of the Slovak Republic,
in the interest of lasting peaceful cooperation with other democratic states,
seeking the application of the democratic form of government, guarantees of a free life, development of spiritual culture and economic prosperity,
that is, we, the citizens of the Slovak Republic,
adopt
through our representatives
this Constitution:
Details of conditions for transporting water for personal use or water provided for humanitarian help and assistance in states of emergency shall be stated in a specific Law.
The Slovak Republic supports the national awareness and cultural identity of the Slovaks living abroad; it supports their institutions established to achieve this purpose and their relations with the mother country.
The state symbols of the Slovak Republic are the state emblem, the national flag, the state seal and the national anthem.
Repealed.
These restrictions may only be used for the prescribed purpose.
Everyone can have rights.
Details will be laid down by law.
The issuing of press is not subject to approval procedures. Enterprise in the fields of radio and television may be subject to the awarding of an approval from the state. The conditions shall be laid down by law.
The legal regulation of all political rights and freedoms and their interpretation and use must enable and protect a free competition of political forces in a democratic society.
Citizens have the right to put up resistance against anyone who would eliminate the democratic order of basic human rights and freedoms listed in this Constitution, if the activity of constitutional bodies and the effective use of legal means are rendered impossible.
Membership in any national minority, or ethnic group, must not be to anyone's detriment.
Employees have the right to just and satisfying working conditions. The law guarantees, above all
Everyone has a right to the protection of health. Based on public insurance, citizens have the right to free health care and to medical supplies under conditions which shall be laid down by law.
Everyone has the right to timely and complete information about the state of the environment and about the causes and consequences of its condition.
Only the law shall lay down which conduct constitutes a criminal act, and what punishment, or other forms of deprivation of rights, or property, may be imposed for its commitment.
The Slovak Republic grants asylum to foreign nationals persecuted for upholding political rights and freedoms. Asylum may be denied to those who acted in violation of basic human rights and freedoms.
Details shall be laid down by law.
The law may restrict the right of judges and prosecutors to engage in entrepreneurial and other business activity and the right listed under Article 29, paragraph 2; the right of employees of state administration bodies and territorial self-administration bodies in designated functions listed also under Article 37, paragraph 4; and the rights of members of armed forces and armed corps listed also under Articles 27 and 28, if these are related to the execution of their duties. The law may restrict the right to strike for persons in professions that are vital for the protection of life and health.
The Slovak Republic is a customs territory.
The Supreme Audit Office submits reports on the results of its audits to the National Council of the Slovak Republic at least once a year and whenever requested to do so by the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
The status, powers, internal organizational structure and basic rules of the control activity of the Supreme Audit Office shall be laid down by law.
A municipality is the basic element of territorial self-administration. Territorial self-administration comprises a municipality and superior territorial unit.
A municipality and superior territorial unit are independent territorial and administrative units of the Slovak Republic comprising persons who are permanently resident on its territory. Details shall be laid down by law.
A municipality and a superior territorial unit may issue generally binding ordinances in the matters of local self-administration and in order to provide for the tasks ensuing for the self-administration from the law.
The prerequisites for a municipality to be declared a town, and the method of doing so, shall be laid down by law, which will also designate the names of town bodies.
The National Council of the Slovak Republic is the sole constitutional and legislative body of the Slovak Republic.
"I swear on my honor and conscience to be faithful to the Slovak Republic. I will discharge my duties in the interest of its citizens. I will uphold the Constitution and other laws and work toward their implementation into life."
The validity of the election of Members of Parliament is verified by the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
A Member of Parliament may refuse to testify in matters about which he learned while discharging his office, even after he ceases to be a Member of Parliament.
A Member of Parliament may surrender the mandate by a personal statement at the session of the National Council of the Slovak Republic. If serious circumstances prevent him from doing that, he may do so in writing in the hands of the Speaker of the National Council of the Slovak Republic, in which case the mandate of the Member of Parliament terminates on the day of delivery of the written decision of surrendering the mandate to the Speaker of the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
The mandate of a Member of Parliament shall terminate by
At the request of the National Council of the Slovak Republic, or its body, a member of the Government of the Slovak Republic, or head of another body of state administration, must participate in its meeting or in the meeting of its body.
The power of the National Council of the Slovak Republic comprises, above all:
The National Council of the Slovak Republic shall discuss the draft resolution annulling presidential decision under Article 102 par. 1 subpar. j) if at least one fifth of its members so request.
The activity of the National Council of the Slovak Republic is managed and organized by the Speaker and deputy speakers.
Every citizen of the Slovak Republic who has the right to vote in elections of the National Council of the Slovak Republic is entitled to participate in the referendum.
A law shall lay down the manner in which the referendum will be carried out.
"I promise on my honor and conscience to be faithful to the Slovak Republic. I will dedicate my effort to the well-being of the Slovak nation and the national minorities and ethnic groups living in the Slovak Republic. I will discharge my duties in the interest of citizens and will uphold and defend the Constitution and other laws."
The President can be prosecuted only for deliberate violation of the Constitution or high treason. The decision on the indictment against the President is made by the National Council of the Slovak Republic by a three-fifth majority vote of all Members of Parliament. The indictment against the President is filed by the National Council of the Slovak Republic with the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic, which decides on the indictment in a plenary meeting. A sentencing decision of the Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic means the loss of the office of the President and eligibility to run for the office again.
The Government of the Slovak Republic is the supreme body of executive power.
At the proposal of the prime minister, the President of the Slovak Republic appoints and recalls other members of the Government and entrusts them with the management of ministries. The President can appoint as deputy prime minister and minister any citizen who may be elected to the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
Members of the Government are sworn in by the President of the Slovak Republic and take the following oath:
"I swear on my honor and conscience to be faithful to the Slovak Republic. I will discharge my duties in the interest of the citizens. I will uphold the Constitution and other laws and work toward their implementation into life."
Within 30 days after its appointment, the Government is obliged to appear before the National Council of the Slovak Republic, to present to it its program, and to request the expression of its confidence.
The Government will always submit its resignation after the constituent meeting of a newly elected National Council of the Slovak Republic; however, the Government executes its duties until a new Government is formed.
The Government as a body decides on
The Government has the right to award amnesty for misdemeanors. Details shall be laid down by law.
Central bodies of state administration and local bodies of state administration are established by law.
Ministries and other bodies of state administration may, on the basis of laws and within their limits, issue generally binding legal regulations if empowered to do so by law. These generally binding legal regulations are promulgated in a manner which shall be laid down by law.
The Constitutional Court of the Slovak Republic is an independent judicial body charged with the protection of constitutionality.
The Constitutional Court provides an interpretation of the Constitution or constitutional laws in disputed matters. The decision of the Constitutional Court on interpretation of the Constitution of a constitutional law is promulgated in a manner established for promulgation of laws. The interpretation is generally  binding as of the day of its promulgation.
The Constitutional Court shall decide on the conformity of resolutions adopted by the National Council of the Slovak Republic which annul an amnesty or a pardon adopted pursuant to Article 86 subpar. i) with the Constitution of the Slovak Republic. The Constitutional Court shall commence proceedings in cases referred to in the first sentence upon its own motion; Article 125 shall apply mutatis mutandis.
Repealed.
There shall be no appeal against a decision of the Constitutional Court; this however does not apply if due to a decision by a body of an international organization set up to ensure the observance of international agreements binding for the Slovak Republic, the Slovak Republic has the obligation in proceedings before the Constitutional Court to reopen a final decision of the Constitutional Court.
"I promise on my honor and conscience that I will protect the inviolability of the natural rights of man and civic rights, protect the principles of the state governed by the rule of law, abide by the Constitution, constitutional laws and international treaties that the Slovak Republic ratified and were promulgated in a manner laid down by law, and decide independently and impartially, according to my best conscience."
The Constitutional Court is headed by its President, who is substituted for by the Vice-President. The President and Vice-President are appointed by the President of the Slovak Republic from among judges of the Constitutional Court.
If a judge of the Constitutional Court surrenders the post of judge of the Constitutional Court, or if he is recalled from it, the President of the Slovak Republic will appoint, out of two persons proposed by the National Council of the Slovak Republic, another judge of the Constitutional Court for a new term of office.
Details on the organization of the Constitutional Court, on the manner of Constitutional Court proceedings and on the status of its judges shall be laid down by law.
The same person may be appointed the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic and the Deputy Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic for a maximum of two consecutive terms. The President of the Slovak Republic may recall the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic, or the Deputy Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Slovak Republic for reasons stipulated in Article 147.
A judge may surrender his post by a written notice to the President of the Slovak Republic. His post terminates at the end of the calendar month when the written notice on surrendering the post was delivered.
The Prosecutor's Office of the Slovak Republic protects rights and the legally protected interests of natural and legal persons and the state.
The Prosecutor's Office is headed by the Prosecutor General who is appointed and recalled by the President of the Slovak Republic at the proposal of the National Council of the Slovak Republic.
Details on appointing and recalling prosecutors and on their rights and duties, as well as on the organization of the Prosecutor's Office, shall be laid down by law.
Rights and duties arising from international treaties by which the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic is bound are transferred to the Slovak Republic to an extent established by a Czech and Slovak Federative Republic constitutional law or by an agreement between the Slovak Republic and the Czech Republic.
The elections of the President of the Slovak Republic under this constitutional law is called by the Speaker of the National Council of the Slovak Republic within 30 days from the day a law issued pursuant to Article 101, paragraph 10 becomes effective.
The following are repealed:
Constitution of the Slovak Republic No. 460/1992 Coll. came into effect on October 1st, 1992, with the exception of Article 3, paragraph 2; Article 23, paragraph 4, as regards the deportation, or extradition of a citizen to another state; Article 53; Article 84, paragraph 3, as regards declaration of war on another state; Article 86, letters k) and l); Article 102, letter g), as regards the appointment of university professors and rectors and the appointment and promotion of generals, and letters j) and k); Article 152, paragraph 1, second sentence, as regards constitutional laws, laws, and other generally binding legal regulations issued by CSFR bodies, which came into force simultaneously with the appropriate changes in the constitutional arrangement of the CSFR, in line with this Constitution.
