In the course of their millennia-old history, the Vietnamese people, working diligently, creatively, and fighting courageously to construct and defend their country, have forged a tradition of patriotism, solidarity, humaneness and righteousness, perseverance and indomitableness, and have created Vietnamese civilization and culture.
Starting in 1930, under the leadership of the Communist Party of Vietnam formed and trained by President Ho Chi Minh, our people waged a protracted revolutionary struggle full of hardships and sacrifices for the independence and freedom of the nation and happiness of the people. August Revolution was successful, and on 2 September 1945, President Ho Chi Minh announced the Declaration of Independence, founding the Democratic Republic of Vietnam which is now the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. With the will and the power of entire nation, and with the assistance of friends across the world, our people have gained great victories in national liberation wars, unified the country, defended the Fatherland, fulfilled international duties, attained historic great achievements in the task of renovation, leading the nation to socialism.
Institutionalizing the Political Creed of building the nation during the transitional period to socialism, and inheriting the 1946 Constitution, 1959 Constitution, 1980 Constitution, and 1992 Constitution, the Vietnamese People frame, implement, and protect this Constitution for the objectives of wealthy people, powerful nation, democracy, justice, and civilization.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam is an independent, sovereign and united country, which in its territorial integrity comprises its mainland, islands, territorial waters and air space.
The State guarantees and promotes the people's mastery; acknowledges, respects, and protects human rights and citizens’ rights; implements the objectives of affluent people, powerful state, democracy, justice, civilization, and that all people enjoy abundant, free, and happy life and are given conditions for all-sided development.
The people practice the state power under the forms of direct democracy and indirect democracy through the National Assembly, the People’s Councils and other state agencies.
The Vietnam Fatherland Front constitutes the political base of the people's government; represents and protects legal and legitimate rights and interests of the people; gathers and promotes the power of great national solidarity, practicing democracy and enhancing social consensus; practices social supervision and critic; participates in the construction of the Party and the State and popular activities of foreign relations, contributing to building and defending the Fatherland.
The Trade Union is the socio-political organization of the working class and the toiling people, created on the voluntary base, represents the workers, looks after and protects the legitimate and legal rights and interests of the workers; participates in state administration and social management; participates in the control, inspection, and supervision of the activity of State organs, organizations, units, and enterprises with respects to the matters concerning the rights and duties of the workers; propagandizes and mobilizes learning, development of the ability and professional skills, conformity of laws, and construction and defence of the Fatherland among the workers.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam consistently carries out a diplomatic policy of independence, autonomy, peace and friendship, cooperation, and development; seeks to multilateral and diversified relations, and actively seek to international integration and cooperation on the basis of respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality, and mutual interest; conforms to the Charter of the United Nation and international treaties in which Vietnam is a member; is a friend, trust partner, and responsible member in international community for national interests and the contribution to the world for peace, national independence, democracy, and social progress.
Every one has the right to live. Human life is protected by the law. No one shall be illegally deprived of his or her life.
The citizen shall enjoy freedom of movement and of residence within the country; and can freely travel abroad and return home from abroad. The exercise of these rights shall be provided by the law.
The citizen shall enjoy the right to freedom of opinion and speech, freedom of the press, to access to information, to assemble, form associations and hold demonstrations. The practice of these rights shall be provided by the law.
The citizen, shall, upon reaching the age of eighteen, have the right to vote, and, upon reaching the age of twenty-one, have the right to stand for election to the National Assembly and the People's Councils. The practice of these rights is provided by the statute.
The citizen, shall, upon reaching the age of eighteen, have the right to vote when the State hold referendum.
Every one enjoys freedom of enterprise in branches and trades not banned by the law.
Citizen has the right to social insurance.
Citizen has the right and the duty to learn.
Every one has the right to carry out scientific and industrial research, engage in literary and artistic creation, and enjoy benefits from those activities.
Every one has the right to enjoy and access to cultural values, participate in cultural life, and make use of cultural bases.
Citizen has the right to determine his or her nationality, use of mother language, and select language of exchange.
Every one has the right to live in fresh environment and has the duty to protect the environment.
The citizen must show loyalty to his Fatherland.
To betray one's Fatherland is the most serious crime.
It is the sacred duty and the noble right of the citizen to defend his Fatherland.
The citizen must fulfil his military obligation and join in the all-people national defence.
The citizen has the duty to obey the Constitution and the law, join in the safeguarding of national security and social order, and conform to the established rules of public life.
The citizen has the duty to pay taxes according to the provisions of the statute.
Foreigners residing in Vietnam must obey the Constitution and law of Vietnam; they shall receive State protection with regard to their lives, possessions and legitimate interests in accordance with the provisions of Vietnamese law.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam shall consider granting asylum to foreigners who are harmed because of their struggling for freedom, national independence, socialism, democracy and peace, and scientific work.
The Socialist Republic of Vietnam constructs an independent and sovereign economy which shall promote its internal resources, internationally cooperate, and closely connect with cultural development; practices social progressiveness and equality; protects the environment; and exercises industrialization and modernization of the country
The State constructs and perfects economic institutions, coordinate the economy on the base of respecting market rules; exercises distribution, decentralization, and separation of authorities in state management; and promotes the connection of regional economy and guarantee the unity of the national economy.
The land, water resources, mineral resources, wealth lying underground or coming from the sea and the air, other natural resources, and property invested and managed by the State are public properties, coming under ownership by the entire people represented and uniformly managed by the State.
State bodies, organizations, and individuals must practice saving and anti-luxury, prevent and fight against corruption in economic-social activities and state management.
To defend the socialist Vietnamese Fatherland is the business of the entire people.
The State shall consolidate and strengthen national defence by the entire people and the people's security, the people's armed forces being regarded as the core, shall develop to the full the aggregate strength of the country to defend the national territory, and shall contribute to the protection of peace in the region and in the world.
State organs, organizations, and individuals shall fulfil all their national defence and security obligations.
The people's armed forces must show absolute loyalty to the Fatherland, the People, the Party, and the State; their duty is to protect national independence and sovereignty, the country's unity and territorial integrity, national security and social order, to protect the People, the Party, the State, and the socialist regime and the fruits of the revolution, and to join the entire people in national construction and fulfillment of international duties.
The State shall build a revolutionary people's army which shall be a well-trained regular army to be gradually modernized, have proper permanent forces, powerful reserves, and strong and comprehensive self-defence militia, and serves as the core of the business of national defence.
The State shall build a revolutionary people's police which shall be a well-trained regular army to be gradually modernized, and serves as the core of the business of national security and social order, preventing and fighting against crimes.
The State shall develop to the full the people's patriotism and revolutionary heroism, educate the entire people in matters of national defence and security, build up the national-defence industry to ensure proper equipment for the armed forces. It shall harmonize national defence with the economy and vice versa, enforce an appropriate policy with regard to soldiers' families, and seek to ensure proper material and spiritual living conditions for officers and soldiers, national-defence workers and employees in consistence with the nature of military and policing activities. It shall build powerful people's armed forces and unceasingly reinforce the country's national-defence potential.
The National Assembly is the highest representative organ of the people and the highest organ of State power of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
The National Assembly exercises constitutional and legislative powers, decides significant national affairs, and exercise supreme control over all activities of the State.
The National Assembly has the following duties and powers:
Upon election, the State President, the Chairman of the National Assembly, the Prime Minister, and the President of the Supreme People's Court must declare oath of allegiance to the Fatherland, the People, and the Constitution.
The Chairman of the National Assembly shall preside over its sessions; authenticate through his signature the Constitution, laws and resolutions of the National Assembly; give leadership to the activities of its Standing Committee; organize the carrying out of its external relations; maintain relationship with the Assembly delegates.
The Vice-Chairmen of the National Assembly shall assist the Chairman in the fulfillment of his duties as required by him.
The Standing Committee of the National Assembly has the following duties and powers:
In case of need, the National Assembly creates provisional committees to examine and check a proposal or investigate a certain problem.
A member of the National Assembly cannot be arrested or prosecuted without the consent of the National Assembly and, in the intervals between its sessions, without the consent of its Standing Committee; in case of a flagrant offence and the deputy is taken into temporary custody, the organ effecting his arrest must immediately report the facts to the National Assembly or its Standing Committee for it to examine them and take a decision.
The ordinances and resolutions of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly must be approved by more than half of its membership.
The State President is the Head of State and represents the Socialist Republic of Vietnam internally and externally.
The State President shall be elected by the National Assembly from among its members.
He is responsible to the National Assembly for his work and reports to it.
His term of office follows that of the National Assembly. At the end of the latter's tenure he shall continue in office until a new President of the State is elected by the new legislature.
The State President has the following duties and powers:
The State President is entitled to attend sessions of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly and sessions of the Government.
The State President has the right to request the Government to hold meeting to discuss on issues which in the consideration of the State President is necessary to exercise his duties and authorities.
The State President shall issue orders and decisions for the accomplishment of his duties and the exercise of his powers.
The Vice-President of the State shall be elected by the National Assembly from among its members.
He shall assist the State President in the performance of his duties and may be delegated by him to perform certain tasks.
When the State President is incapacitated for work over a long period of time, the Vice-President shall act as President.
In case of vacancy of the State Presidency, the Vice-President shall be acting President until the election of a new President by the National Assembly.
The Government is the executive organ of the National Assembly, exercise the executive power, and is the highest organ of State administration of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
The Government is accountable to the National Assembly and shall make its reports to the National Assembly, its Standing Committee, and the State President.
The structure and numbers of members of the Government are decided by the National Assembly.
The Government shall operate as a collegium and take its decisions by a vote of the majority.
The tenure of the Government is the same as that of the National Assembly. When the latter's tenure ends the Government shall continue in office until the new legislature establishes a new Government.
The Prime Minister is elected by the National Assembly among its members.
The Prime Minister has the following duties and powers:
The Government, the Prime Minister, minsters and heads of organs of ministerial rank shall issue legal documents to exercise their duties and authorities, review the implementation of these documents, and handle illegal documents in concordance with the law.
The Chairman of the Central Committee of the Vietnamese Fatherland Front and the heads of socio-political organizations shall be invited to attend the sessions of the Government when relevant problems come up for discussion.
The sentences and decisions of the People's Court which have acquired legal effect must be respected by organs, organizations, and individuals; they must be seriously complied with by the organs, organizations, and individuals concerned.
The province is divided into districts, provincial cities, and towns; the city under direct central rule is divided into urban districts, rural districts, towns, and units of similar level.
The district is divided into communes and townlets; the provincial city and the town are divided into wards and communes; the urban district is divided into wards.
Special administrative-economic units are created by the National Assembly.
The Head of the State Audit is responsible and makes his reports of the result of audit to the National Assembly and, when the latter is not in session, to its Standing Committee.
All other legal documents must conform to the Constitution.
All actions violating the Constitution shall be dealt with.
