The official language of the Federal Republic of Somalia is Somali (Maay and Maxaa-tiri), and Arabic is the second language.
The status of the capital city of Somalia shall be determined in the constitutional review process, and the two houses of the Somali Federal Parliament shall enact a special law with regards to this issue.
Everyone has the right to life.
A person may not be subjected to slavery, servitude, trafficking, or forced labour for any purpose.
Every person has the right to associate with other individuals and groups. This includes the right to form and belong to organizations, including trade unions and political parties. It also includes the right not to associate with others, and a person cannot be forced to associate with individuals or groups.
Every citizen has the right to choose their trade, occupation or profession freely.
Every person has the right to administrative decisions which are lawful, reasonable and conducted in a procedurally fair manner.
The allocation of the natural resources of the Federal Republic of Somalia shall be negotiated by, and agreed upon, by the Federal Government and the Federal Member States in accordance with this Constitution.
The regulations concerning political parties, their registration, elections at the Federal Government level and the National Independent Electoral Commission shall be defined in special laws enacted by the House of the People of the Federal Parliament.
The various levels of government, in all interactions between themselves and in the exercise of their legislative functions and other powers, shall observe the principles of federalism, which are:
The allocation of powers and resources shall be negotiated and agreed upon by the Federal Government and the Federal Member States (pending the formation of Federal Member States), except in matters concerning:
The Houses of the Federal Parliament:
Responsibilities of the joint sittings of the two Houses of the Federal Parliament include:
The House of the People of the Federal Parliament represents all the people of Somalia, and the legislative duties tasked solely to the House of the People of the Federal Parliament are as follows:
The House of the People of the Federal Parliament cannot be dissolved before the end of its four-year term unless the House has been unable to approve the Council of Ministers and the program of the government under Article 100, Paragraph (c).
The Upper House of the Federal Parliament represents the Federal Member States, and its legislative duties include:
The members of the Upper House of the Federal Parliament shall be elected through a direct, secret and free ballot by the people of the Federal Member States, and their number shall be no more than 54 members based on the eighteen (18) regions that existed in Somalia before 1991, and on the following:
The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Upper House of the Federal Parliament shall be elected and dismissed through the same procedures that apply to those of the elections for the Speaker and Deputy Speakers of the House of the People of the Federal Parliament.
The secretaries of the Houses of the Federal Parliament and the Attorney General of the Federal Republic of Somalia shall be responsible for keeping records of laws passed by the Federal Parliament, and for their publication in the Official Gazette.
Draft legislation becomes law once it has been passed in accordance with the legislative procedure as stipulated in this Chapter, signed by the President of the Federal Republic, and published in the Official Gazette.
Any citizen is eligible for the position of President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, as long as he or she meets the eligibility requirements of:
The powers and responsibilities of the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia are to:
The President of the Federal Republic of Somalia shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, starting from the day he takes the oath of the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, in accordance with Article 96 of the Constitution.
The President of the Federal Republic of Somalia may resign to the Federal Parliament through the Speaker of the House of the People of the Federal Parliament.
Before assuming office, the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia shall take an oath before the Federal Parliament, administered by the Chairman of the High Court, which shall be as follows:
"I swear in the name of Allah that I will perform my duties honestly and in the best interest of the Nation, People and Religion, and that I will abide by the Constitution and the other Laws of the Country"
The Council of Ministers has the powers to:
The responsibilities of the Prime Minister are to:
The Deputy Prime Minister acts for the Prime Minister when the Prime Minister is out of the country, and carries out other responsibilities as may be delegated by the Prime Minister.
Between the date of a general election and the swearing in of the new Prime Minister, the existing Prime Minister and Council of Ministers shall continue to serve in a caretaker capacity to carry out routine duties.
After obtaining a vote of confidence, the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers shall, before assuming their duties, take the Oath in a special session of the House of the People of the Federal Parliament, administered by the Chairman of the High Court, and which shall read as follows:
"I swear in the name of Allah that I will perform my duties honestly and in the best interest of the Nation, People and Religion, and that I will abide by the Constitution and the other Laws of the Country"
The national court structure shall be of three levels, which are:
Unless the constitution provides otherwise, the relevant Minister shall propose the names of commissioners, to the Council of Ministers. If the Council of Ministers approves, the names shall be submitted to the concerned House of the Federal Parliament. If the concerned House of the Federal Parliament approves the names, they shall be sent to the President of the Federal Republic for formal appointment.
The regulations of the Independent Commissions shall be stated in a law passed made by the House of the People of the Federal Parliament.
There shall be independent institutions which the Federal Government and the Federal Member States shall have; such as the Attorney General, the Auditor General and the Federal Central Bank.
The civil service at all levels of government is a pledge to serve the people and shall be based on the values of the constitution, compassion, transparency, community service, respect for administrative hierarchy, obedience, confidentiality, work ethics, efficiency, effectiveness, professionalism protect principles of fairness, equality and best practices.
Civil servants may not be:
High ranking public employees and officials of the government as defined by the law, shall be appointed by the President of the Federal Republic of Somalia, after considering the proposal by the Council of Ministers.
The establishment of the legislative and executive bodies of government of the Federal Member States is a matter for the constitutions of the Federal Member States.
The Principles of the public finance will be discussed between the Federal Government and Federal Member State in accordance with the constitution.
A law enacted by the Federal Parliament shall provide the framework for financial management with the following characteristics among others:
Human rights abuses alleged to have been committed by members of the armed forces against civilians shall be brought before a civilian court.
The two Houses of the Parliament shall enact a law governing the structure, functions and levels of the security agencies of the Federal Republic of Somalia.
All laws in force immediately before the effective date shall continue to be in force and shall be construed and applied with such alterations, adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring them into conformity with this Constitution until such time as such laws are amended or repealed.
Until the treaty imposing a treaty obligation in effect on the date that this Constitution comes into force expires or is amended, that treaty obligation remains in effect.
The Transitional Federal Charter ceases to exist upon the dissolution of the National Constituent Assembly.
[image]
[image]
In terms of Article 133 and 134, the Somali Federal Parliament shall propose and enact amendments to this Provisional Constitution, in conformity with agreements negotiated between the Federal Government and the Existing Federal Member States and new Federal Member States, including but not limited to the following:
The Drafting Commission shall prioritize drafting projects concerning new laws, in conformity with agreements negotiated between the Federal Government and the existing Federal Member States and new Federated States, including but not limited to the following:
