We, the people of South Africa,
Recognise the injustices of our past;
Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land;
Respect those who have worked to build and develop our country; and
Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united in our diversity.
We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to
Lay the foundations for a democratic and open society in which government is based on the will of the people and every citizen is equally protected by law;
Improve the quality of life of all citizens and free the potential of each person; and
Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state in the family of nations.
May God protect our people.
Nkosi Sikelel’ iAfrika. Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso.
God seën Suid-Afrika. God bless South Africa.
Mudzimu fhatutshedza Afurika. Hosi katekisa Afrika.
The Republic of South Africa is one, sovereign, democratic state founded on the following values:
This Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic; law or conduct inconsistent with it is invalid, and the obligations imposed by it must be fulfilled.
The national anthem of the Republic is determined by the President by proclamation.
The national flag of the Republic is black, gold, green, white, red and blue, as described and sketched in Schedule 1.
Everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected.
Everyone has the right to life.
No one may be subjected to slavery, servitude or forced labour.
Everyone has the right to privacy, which includes the right not to have-
Everyone has the right, peacefully and unarmed, to assemble, to demonstrate, to picket and to present petitions.
Everyone has the right to freedom of association.
No citizen may be deprived of citizenship.
Every citizen has the right to choose their trade, occupation or profession freely. The practice of a trade, occupation or profession may be regulated by law.
Everyone has the right-
Everyone has the right to use the language and to participate in the cultural life of their choice, but no one exercising these rights may do so in a manner inconsistent with any provision of the Bill of Rights.
Everyone has the right to have any dispute that can be resolved by the application of law decided in a fair public hearing before a court or, where appropriate, another independent and impartial tribunal or forum.
9
Equality
With respect to unfair discrimination solely on the grounds of race, colour, ethnic or social origin, sex, religion or language
10
Human dignity
Entirely
11
Life
Entirely
12
Freedom and security of the person
With respect to subsections (1) (d) and (e) and 2 (c)
13
Slavery, servitude and forced labour
With respect to slavery and servitude
28
Children
With respect to:
the rights in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of subsection (1) (g); and
subsection (1) (i) in respect of children of 15 years and younger
35
Arrested, detained and accused persons
With respect to:
the rights in paragraphs (a) to (o) of subsection (3), excluding paragraph (d);
subsection (4); and
subsection (5) with respect to the exclusion of evidence if the admission of that evidence would render the trial unfair
Anyone listed in this section has the right to approach a competent court, alleging that a right in the Bill of Rights has been infringed or threatened, and the court may grant appropriate relief, including a declaration of rights. The persons who may approach a court are-
In the Republic, the legislative authority-
Before members of the National Assembly begin to perform their functions in the Assembly, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
The President and any member of the Cabinet or any Deputy Minister who is not a member of the National Assembly may, subject to the rules and orders of the Assembly, attend and speak in the Assembly, but may not vote.
The National Assembly or any of its committees may-
Not more than ten part-time representatives designated by organised local government in terms of section 163, to represent the different categories of municipalities, may participate when necessary in the proceedings of the National Council of Provinces, but may not vote.
In exercising its legislative power, the National Council of Provinces may-
The National Council of Provinces or any of its committees may-
A Bill assented to and signed by the President becomes an Act of Parliament, must be published promptly, and takes effect when published or on a date determined in terms of the Act.
The signed copy of an Act of Parliament is conclusive evidence of the provisions of that Act and, after publication, must be entrusted to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping.
The President-
When elected President, a person ceases to be a member of the National Assembly and, within five days, must assume office by swearing or affirming faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
When an election of the National Assembly is held, the Cabinet, the Deputy President, Ministers and any Deputy Ministers remain competent to function until the person elected President by the next Assembly assumes office.
Before the Deputy President, Ministers and any Deputy Ministers begin to perform their functions, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
The President by proclamation may transfer to a member of the Cabinet-
The President may assign to a Cabinet member any power or function of another member who is absent from office or is unable to exercise that power or perform that function.
A Cabinet member may assign any power or function that is to be exercised or performed in terms of an Act of Parliament to a member of a provincial Executive Council or to a Municipal Council. An assignment-
Before members of a provincial legislature begin to perform their functions in the legislature, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
A province’s permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces may attend, and may speak in, their provincial legislature and its committees, but may not vote. The legislature may require a permanent delegate to attend the legislature or its committees.
A provincial legislature or any of its committees may-
Only members of the Executive Council of a province or a committee or member of a provincial legislature may introduce a Bill in the legislature; but only the member of the Executive Council who is responsible for financial matters in the province may introduce a money Bill in the legislature.
A Bill assented to and signed by the Premier of a province becomes a provincial Act, must be published promptly and takes effect when published or on a date determined in terms of the Act.
The signed copy of a provincial Act is conclusive evidence of the provisions of that Act and, after publication, must be entrusted to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping .
A member of the Executive Council of a province may assign any power or function that is to be exercised or performed in terms of an Act of Parliament or a provincial Act, to a Municipal Council. An assignment-
A Premier-elect must assume office within five days of being elected, by swearing or affirming faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
When an election of a provincial legislature is held, the Executive Council and its members remain competent to function until the person elected Premier by the next legislature assumes office.
Before members of the Executive Council of a province begin to perform their functions, they must swear or affirm faithfulness to the Republic and obedience to the Constitution, in accordance with Schedule 2.
The Premier by proclamation may transfer to a member of the Executive Council-
The Premier of a province may assign to a member of the Executive Council any power or function of another member who is absent from office or is unable to exercise that power or perform that function.
within 14 days after the intervention began;
A provincial legislature may pass a constitution for the province or, where applicable, amend its constitution, if at least two thirds of its members vote in favour of the Bill.
If a dispute concerning a conflict cannot be resolved by a court, the national legislation prevails over the provincial legislation or provincial constitution.
A decision by a court that legislation prevails over other legislation does not invalidate that other legislation, but that other legislation becomes inoperative for as long as the conflict remains.
When considering an apparent conflict between national and provincial legislation, or between national legislation and a provincial constitution, every court must prefer any reasonable interpretation of the legislation or constitution that avoids a conflict, over any alternative interpretation that results in a conflict.
A municipality must-
Provincial legislation within the framework of national legislation may provide for privileges and immunities of Municipal Councils and their members.
An Act of Parliament enacted in accordance with the procedure established by section 76 must-
Any matter concerning local government not dealt with in the Constitution may be prescribed by national legislation or by provincial legislation within the framework of national legislation.
The courts are-
All other courts other than those referred to in sections 167, 168, and 169 may decide any matter determined by an Act of Parliament, but a court of a status lower than the High Court of South Africa may not enquire into or rule on the constitutionality of any legislation or any conduct of the President.
All courts function in terms of national legislation, and their rules and procedures must be provided for in terms of national legislation.
The Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court of Appeal and the High Court of South Africa each has the inherent power to protect and regulate their own process, and to develop the common law, taking into account the interests of justice.
National legislation may provide for any matter concerning the administration of justice that is not dealt with in the Constitution, including-
The Public Protector is appointed for a non-renewable period of seven years.
The Auditor-General must be appointed for a fixed, non-renewable term of between five and ten years.
The Electoral Commission must be composed of at least three persons. The number of members and their terms of office must be prescribed by national legislation.
National legislation must establish an independent authority to regulate broadcasting in the public interest, and to ensure fairness and a diversity of views broadly representing South African society.
The following principles govern national security in the Republic:
A civilian secretariat for defence must be established by national legislation to function under the direction of the Cabinet member responsible for defence.
A civilian secretariat for the police service must be established by national legislation to function under the direction of the Cabinet member responsible for policing.
National legislation must regulate the objects, powers and functions of the intelligence services, including any intelligence division of the defence force or police service, and must provide for-
The Commission must report regularly both to Parliament and to the provincial legislatures.
The South African Reserve Bank is the central bank of the Republic and is regulated in terms of an Act of Parliament.
The powers and functions of the South African Reserve Bank are those customarily exercised and performed by central banks, which powers and functions must be determined by an Act of Parliament and must be exercised or performed subject to the conditions prescribed in terms of that Act.
Customary international law is law in the Republic unless it is inconsistent with the Constitution or an Act of Parliament.
When interpreting any legislation, every court must prefer any reasonable interpretation of the legislation that is consistent with international law over any alternative interpretation that is inconsistent with international law.
In order to deepen the culture of democracy established by the Constitution, Parliament may adopt Charters of Rights consistent with the provisions of the Constitution.
The right of the South African people as a whole to self-determination, as manifested in this Constitution, does not preclude, within the framework of this right, recognition of the right of self-determination of any community sharing a common cultural and language heritage, within a territorial entity in the Republic or in any other way, determined by national legislation.
To enhance multi-party democracy, national legislation must provide for the funding of political parties participating in national and provincial legislatures on an equitable and proportional basis.
All constitutional obligations must be performed diligently and without delay.
An executive organ of state in any sphere of government may-
In the Constitution, unless the context indicates otherwise
“organ of state” means
but does not include a court or a judicial officer;
“provincial legislation” includes
In the event of an inconsistency between different texts of the Constitution, the English text prevails.
Schedule 6 applies to the transition to the new constitutional order established by this Constitution, and any matter incidental to that transition.
The laws mentioned in Schedule 7 are repealed, subject to section 243 and Schedule 6.
The Province of the Eastern Cape
Map No. 6 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 7 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 8 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 9 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 10 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 11 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of the Free State
Map No. 13 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 14 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 15 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 16 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of Gauteng
Map No. 17 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 18 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 19 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 20 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 21 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of KwaZulu-Natal
Map No. 23 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 24 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 25 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 26 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 27 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 28 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 29 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 30 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 31 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 32 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of Limpopo
Map No. 34 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 35 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 36 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 37 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of Mpumalanga
Map No. 39 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 40 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of the Northern Cape
Map No. 42 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 43 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 44 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 45 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of North West
Map No. 46 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 47 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 48 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The Province of the Western Cape
Map No. 50 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 51 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 52 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 53 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
Map No. 54 of Schedule 2 to Notice 1998 of 2005
The President or Acting President, before the Chief Justice, or another judge designated by the Chief Justice, must swear/affirm as follows:
In the presence of everyone assembled here, and in full realisation of the high calling I assume as President/Acting President of the Republic of South Africa, I, A.B., swear/ solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa, and will obey, observe, uphold and maintain the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I solemnly and sincerely promise that I will always-
protect and promote the rights of all South Africans;
discharge my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience;
do justice to all; and
devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and all of its people
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
The Deputy President, before the Chief Justice or another judge designated by the Chief Justice, must swear/affirm as follows:
In the presence of everyone assembled here, and in full realisation of the high calling I assume as Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa, I, A.B., swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, observe, uphold and maintain the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I solemnly and sincerely promise that I will always-
be a true and faithful counsellor;
discharge my duties with all my strength and talents to the best of my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience;
do justice to all; and
devote myself to the well-being of the Republic and all of its people.
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
Each Minister and Deputy Minister, before the Chief Justice or another judge designated by the Chief Justice, must swear/affirm as follows:
I, A.B., swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I undertake to hold my office as Minister/Deputy Minister with honour and dignity; to be a true and faithful counsellor; not to divulge directly or indirectly any secret matter entrusted to me; and to perform the functions of my office conscientiously and to the best of my ability.
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
I, A.B., swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I solemnly promise to perform my functions as a member of the National Assembly/ permanent delegate to the National Council of Provinces/member of the legislature of the province of C.D. to the best of my ability.
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
The Premier or Acting Premier of a province, and each member of the Executive Council of a province, before the Chief Justice or a judge designated by the Chief Justice, must swear/affirm as follows:
I, A.B., swear/solemnly affirm that I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa and will obey, respect and uphold the Constitution and all other law of the Republic; and I undertake to hold my office as Premier/Acting Premier/ member of the Executive Council of the province of C.D. with honour and dignity; to be a true and faithful counsellor; not to divulge directly or indirectly any secret matter entrusted to me; and to perform the functions of my office conscientiously and to the best of my ability.
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
I, A.B., swear/solemnly affirm that, as a Judge of the Constitutional Court/Supreme Court of Appeal/High Court/ E.F. Court, I will be faithful to the Republic of South Africa, will uphold and protect the Constitution and the human rights entrenched in it, and will administer justice to all persons alike without fear, favour or prejudice, in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
(In the case of an oath: So help me God.)
The procedure see out in this Schedule applies whenever-
The person presiding at a meeting to which this Schedule applies must call for the nomination of candidates at the meeting.
At a meeting to which this Schedule applies, the person presiding must announce the names of the persons who have been nominated as candidates, but may not permit any debate.
If only one candidate is nominated, the person presiding must declare that candidate elected.
If more the one candidate is nominated-
Agriculture
Airports other than international and national airports
Animal control and diseases
Casinos, racing, gambling and wagering, excluding lotteries and sports pools
Consumer protection
Cultural matters
Disaster management
Education at all levels, excluding tertiary education
Environment
Health services
Housing
Indigenous law and customary law, subject to Chapter 12 of the Constitution
Industrial promotion
Language policy and the regulation of official languages to the extent that the provisions of section 6 of the Constitution expressly confer upon the provincial legislatures legislative competence
Media services directly controlled or provided by the provincial government, subject to section 192
Nature conservation, excluding national parks, national botanical gardens and marine resources
Police to the extent that the provisions of Chapter 11 of the Constitution confer upon the provincial legislatures legislative competence
Pollution control
Population development
Property transfer fees
Provincial public enterprises in respect of the functional areas in this Schedule and Schedule 5
Public transport
Public works only in respect of the needs of provincial government departments in the discharge of their responsibilities to administer functions specifically assigned to them in terms of the Constitution or any other law
Regional planning and development
Road traffic regulation
Soil conservation
Tourism
Trade
Traditional leadership, subject to Chapter 12 of the Constitution
Urban and rural development
Vehicle licensing
Welfare services
The following local government matters to the extent set out in section 155 (6) (a) and (7):
Building regulations
Child care facilities
Electricity and gas reticulation
Firefighting services
Local tourism
Municipal airports
Municipal planning
Municipal health services
Municipal public transport
Municipal public works only in respect of the needs of municipalities in the discharge of their responsibilities to administer functions specifically assigned to them under this Constitution or any other law
Pontoons, ferries, jetties, piers and harbours, excluding the regulation of international and national shipping and matters related thereto
Stormwater management systems in built-up areas
Trading regulations
Water and sanitation services limited to potable water supply systems and domestic wastewater and sewage disposal systems
Ambulance services
Archives other than national archives
Libraries other than national libraries
Liquor licences
Museums other than national museums
Provincial planning
Provincial cultural matters
Provincial recreation and amenities
Provincial sport
Provincial roads and traffic
Veterinary services, excluding regulation of the profession
The following local government matters to the extent set out for provinces in section 155 (6) (a) and (7):
Billboards and the display of advertisements in public places
Cemeteries, funeral parlours and crematoria
Cleansing
Control of public nuisances
Control of undertakings that sell liquor to the public
Facilities for the accommodation, care and burial of animals
Fencing and fences
Licensing of dogs
Licensing and control of undertakings that sell food to the public
Local amenities
Local sport facilities
Markets
Municipal abattoirs
Municipal parks and recreation
Municipal roads
Noise pollution
Pounds
Public places
Refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid waste disposal
Street trading
Street lighting
Traffic and parking
In this Schedule, unless inconsistent with the context-
‘new Constitution’ means the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996;
‘old order legislation’ means legislation enacted before the previous Constitution took effect;
‘previous Constitution’ means the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993).
Permanent Delegates - ANC 5, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 4
Permanent Delegates - ANC 4, FF 1, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 4
Permanent Delegates - ANC 3, DP 1, FF 1, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 3, NP 1
Permanent Delegates - ANC 1, DP 1, IFP 3, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 2, IFP 2
Permanent Delegates - ANC 4, FF 1, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 4
Permanent Delegates - ANC 3, FF 1, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 2, NP 2
Permanent Delegates - ANC 6
Special Delegates - ANC 4
Permanent Delegates - ANC 4, FF 1, NP 1
Special Delegates - ANC 4
Permanent Delegates - ANC 2, DP 1, NP 3
Special Delegates - ANC 1, NP 3
A provincial constitution passed before the new Constitution took effect must comply with section 143 of the new Constitution.
All proceedings which were pending before a court when the new Constitution took effect, must be disposed of as if the new Constitution had not been enacted, unless the interests of justice require otherwise.
A person who continues in office in terms of this Schedule and who has taken the oath of office or has made a solemn affirmation under the previous Constitution, is not obliged to repeat the oath of office or solemn affirmation under the new Constitution.
‘(1) Every person has the right of access to all information held by the state or any of its organs in any sphere of government in so far as that information is required for the exercise or protection of any of their rights.’; and
‘Every person has the right to
(a) lawful administrative action where any of their rights or interests is affected or threatened;
(b) procedurally fair administrative action where any of their rights or legitimate expectations is affected or threatened;
(c) be furnished with reasons in writing for administrative action which affects any of their rights or interests unless the reasons for that action have been made public; and
(d) administrative action which is justifiable in relation to the reasons given for it where any of their rights is affected or threatened.’
Sections 82 and 124 of the new Constitution do not affect the safekeeping of Acts of Parliament or provincial Acts passed before the new Constitution took effect.
‘1. Parties registered in terms of national legislation and contesting an election of the National Assembly, shall nominate candidates for such election on lists of candidates prepared in accordance with this Schedule and national legislation.’
‘2. The seats in the National Assembly as determined in terms of section 46 of the new Constitution, shall be filled as follows:
(a) One half of the seats from regional lists submitted by the respective parties, with a fixed number of seats reserved for each region as determined by the Commission for the next election of the Assembly, taking into account available scientifically based data in respect of voters, and representations by interested parties.
(b) The other half of the seats from national lists submitted by the respective parties, or from regional lists where national lists were not submitted.’
‘3. The lists of candidates submitted by a party, shall in total contain the names of not more than a number of candidates equal to the number of seats in the National Assembly, and each such list shall denote such names in such fixed order of preference as the party may determine.’
‘5. The seats referred to in item 2 (a) shall be allocated per region to the parties contesting an election, as follows:.’
‘6. The seats referred to in item 2 (b) shall be allocated to the parties contesting an election, as follows:’; and
‘(a) A quota of votes per seat shall be determined by dividing the total number of votes cast nationally by the number of seats in the National Assembly, plus one, and the result plus one, disregarding fractions, shall be the quota of votes per seat.’
‘(b) An amended quota of votes per seat shall be determined by dividing the total number of votes cast nationally, minus the number of votes cast nationally in favour of the party referred to in paragraph (a), by the number of seats in the Assembly, plus one, minus the number of seats finally allocated to the said party in terms of paragraph (a).’
‘10. The number of seats in each provincial legislature shall be as determined in terms of section 105 of the new Constitution.’
‘11. Parties registered in terms of national legislation and contesting an election of a provincial legislature, shall nominate candidates for election to such provincial legislature on provincial lists prepared in accordance with this Schedule and national legislation.’
‘16 Designation of representatives
(1) After the counting of votes has been concluded, the number of representatives of each party has been determined and the election result has been declared in terms of section 190 of the new Constitution, the Commission shall, within two days after such declaration, designate from each list of candidates, published in terms of national legislation, the representatives of each party in the legislature.
(2) Following the designation in terms of subitem (1), if a candidate’s name appears on more than one list for the National Assembly or on lists for both the National Assembly and a provincial legislature (if an election of the Assembly and a provincial legislature is held at the same time), and such candidate is due for designation as a representative in more than one case, the party which submitted such lists shall, within two days after the said declaration, indicate to the Commission from which list such candidate will be designated or in which legislature the candidate will serve, as the case may be, in which event the candidate’s name shall be deleted from the other lists.
(3) The Commission shall forthwith publish the list of names of representatives in the legislature or legislatures.’
‘(b) a representative is appointed as a permanent delegate to the National Council of Provinces;.’
‘19. Lists of candidates of a party referred to in item 16 (1) may be supplemented on one occasion only at any time during the first 12 months following the date on which the designation of representatives in terms of item 16 has been concluded, in order to fill casual vacancies: Provided that any such supplementation shall be made at the end of the list.’
‘23 Vacancies
(1) In the event of a vacancy in a legislature to which this Schedule applies, the party which nominated the vacating member shall fill the vacancy by nominating a person-
(a) whose name appears on the list of candidates from which the vacating member was originally nominated; and
(b) who is the next qualified and available person on the list.
(2) A nomination to fill a vacancy shall be submitted to the Speaker in writing.
(3) If a party represented in a legislature dissolves or ceases to exist and the members in question vacate their seats in consequence of item 23A (1), the seats in question shall be allocated to the remaining parties mutatis mutandis as if such seats were forfeited seats in terms of item 7 or 14, as the case may be.’
‘23A Additional ground for loss of membership of legislatures
(1) A person loses membership of a legislature to which this Schedule applies if that person ceases to be a member of the party which nominated that person as a member of the legislature.
(2) Despite subitem (1) any existing political party may at any time change its name.
(3) An Act of Parliament may, within a reasonable period after the new Constitution took effect, be passed in accordance with section 76 (1) of the new Constitution to amend this item and item 23 to provide for the manner in which it will be possible for a member of a legislature who ceases to be a member of the party which nominated that member, to retain membership of such legislature.
(4) An Act of Parliament referred to in subitem (3) may also provide for-
(a) any existing party to merge with another party; or
(b) any party to subdivide into more than one party.’
‘(3) The President must consult the Executive Deputy Presidents-
(a) in the development and execution of the policies of the national government;
(b) in all matters relating to the management of the Cabinet and the performance of Cabinet business;
(c) in the assignment of functions to the Executive Deputy Presidents;
(d) before making any appointment under the Constitution or any legislation, including the appointment of ambassadors or other diplomatic representatives;
(e) before appointing commissions of inquiry;
(f) before calling a referendum; and
(g) before pardoning or reprieving offenders.’
‘(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply also to an Executive Deputy President.’
‘(a) an Executive Deputy President designated by the President;.’
‘91 Cabinet
(1) The Cabinet consists of the President, the Executive Deputy Presidents and-
(a) not more than 27 Ministers who are members of the National Assembly and appointed in terms of subsections (8) to (12); and
(b) not more than one Minister who is not a member of the National Assembly and appointed in terms of subsection (13), provided the President, acting in consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the participating parties, deems the appointment of such a Minister expedient.
(2) Each party holding at least 80 seats in the National Assembly is entitled to designate an Executive Deputy President from among the members of the Assembly.
(3) If no party or only one party holds 80 or more seats in the Assembly, the party holding the largest number of seats and the party holding the second largest number of seats are each entitled to designate one Executive Deputy President from among the members of the Assembly.
(4) On being designated, an Executive Deputy President may elect to remain or cease to be a member of the Assembly.
(5) An Executive Deputy President may exercise the powers and must perform the functions vested in the office of Executive Deputy President by the Constitution or assigned to that office by the President.
(6) An Executive Deputy President holds office-
(a) until 30 April 1999 unless replaced or recalled by the party entitled to make the designation in terms of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) until the person elected President after any election of the National Assembly held before 30 April 1999, assumes office.
(7) A vacancy in the office of an Executive Deputy President may be filled by the party which designated that Deputy President.
(8) A party holding at least 20 seats in the National Assembly and which has decided to participate in the government of national unity, is entitled to be allocated one or more of the Cabinet portfolios in respect of which Ministers referred to in subsection (1) (a) are to be appointed, in proportion to the number of seats held by it in the National Assembly relative to the number of seats held by the other participating parties.
(9) Cabinet portfolios must be allocated to the respective participating parties in accordance with the following formula:
(a) A quota of seats per portfolio must be determined by dividing the total number of seats in the National Assembly held jointly by the participating parties by the number of portfolios in respect of which Ministers referred to in subsection (1) (a) are to be appointed, plus one.
(b) The result, disregarding third and subsequent decimals, if any, is the quota of seats per portfolio.
(c) The number of portfolios to be allocated to a participating party is determined by dividing the total number of seats held by that party in the National Assembly by the quota referred to in paragraph (b).
(d) The result, subject to paragraph (e), indicates the number of portfolios to be allocated to that party.
(e) Where the application of the above formula yields a surplus not absorbed by the number of portfolios allocated to a party, the surplus competes with other similar surpluses accruing to another party or parties, and any portfolio or portfolios which remain unallocated must be allocated to the party or parties concerned in sequence of the highest surplus.
(10) The President after consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the participating parties must-
(a) determine the specific portfolios to be allocated to the respective participating parties in accordance with the number of portfolios allocated to them in terms of subsection (9);
(b) appoint in respect of each such portfolio a member of the National Assembly who is a member of the party to which that portfolio was allocated under paragraph (a), as the Minister responsible for that portfolio;
(c) if it becomes necessary for the purposes of the Constitution or in the interest of good government, vary any determination under paragraph (a), subject to subsection (9);
(d) terminate any appointment under paragraph (b)-
(i) if the President is requested to do so by the leader of the party of which the Minister in question is a member; or
(ii) if it becomes necessary for the purposes of the Constitution or in the interest of good government; or
(e) fill, when necessary, subject to paragraph (b), a vacancy in the office of Minister.
(11) Subsection (10) must be implemented in the spirit embodied in the concept of a government of national unity, and the President and the other functionaries concerned must in the implementation of that subsection seek to achieve consensus at all times: Provided that if consensus cannot be achieved on-
(a) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (a), (c) or (d) (ii) of that subsection, the President’s decision prevails;
(b) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (b), (d) (i) or (e) of that subsection affecting a person who is not a member of the President’s party, the decision of the leader of the party of which that person is a member prevails; and
(c) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (b) or (e) of that subsection affecting a person who is a member of the President’s party, the President’s decision prevails.
(12) If any determination of portfolio allocations is varied under subsection (10) (c), the affected Ministers must vacate their portfolios but are eligible, where applicable, for reappointment to other portfolios allocated to their respective parties in terms of the varied determination.
(13) The President-
(a) in consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the participating parties, must-
(i) determine a specific portfolio for a Minister referred to in subsection (1) (b) should it become necessary pursuant to a decision of the President under that subsection;
(ii) appoint in respect of that portfolio a person who is not a member of the National Assembly, as the Minister responsible for that portfolio; and
(iii) fill, if necessary, a vacancy in respect of that portfolio; or
(b) after consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the participating parties, must terminate any appointment under paragraph (a) if it becomes necessary for the purposes of the Constitution or in the interest of good government.
(14) Meetings of the Cabinet must be presided over by the President, or, if the President so instructs, by an Executive Deputy President: Provided that the Executive Deputy Presidents preside over meetings of the Cabinet in turn unless the exigencies of government and the spirit embodied in the concept of a government of national unity otherwise demand.
(15) The Cabinet must function in a manner which gives consideration to the consensus- seeking spirit embodied in the concept of a government of national unity as well as the need for effective government.’
‘93 Appointment of Deputy Ministers
(1) The President may, after consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the parties participating in the Cabinet, establish deputy ministerial posts.
(2) A party is entitled to be allocated one or more of the deputy ministerial posts in the same proportion and according to the same formula that portfolios in the Cabinet are allocated.
(3) The provisions of section 91 (10) to (12) apply, with the necessary changes, in respect of Deputy Ministers, and in such application a reference in that section to a Minister or a portfolio must be read as a reference to a Deputy Minister or a deputy ministerial post, respectively.
(4) If a person is appointed as the Deputy Minister of any portfolio entrusted to a Minister-
(a) that Deputy Minister must exercise and perform on behalf of the relevant Minister any of the powers and functions assigned to that Minister in terms of any legislation or otherwise which may, subject to the directions of the President, be assigned to that Deputy Minister by that Minister; and
(b) any reference in any legislation to that Minister must be construed as including a reference to the Deputy Minister acting in terms of an assignment under paragraph (a) by the Minister for whom that Deputy Minister acts.
(5) Whenever a Deputy Minister is absent or for any reason unable to exercise or perform any of the powers or functions of office, the President may appoint any other Deputy Minister or any other person to act in the said Deputy Minister’s stead, either generally or in the exercise or performance of any specific power or function.’
‘(3) Ministers are accountable individually to the President and to the National Assembly for the administration of their portfolios, and all members of the Cabinet are correspondingly accountable collectively for the performance of the functions of the national government and for its policies.
(4) Ministers must administer their portfolios in accordance with the policy determined by the Cabinet.
(5) If a Minister fails to administer the portfolio in accordance with the policy of the Cabinet, the President may require the Minister concerned to bring the administration of the portfolio into conformity with that policy.
(6) If the Minister concerned fails to comply with a requirement of the President under subsection (5), the President may remove the Minister from office-
(a) if it is a Minister referred to in section 91 (1) (a), after consultation with the Minister and, if the Minister is not a member of the President’s party or is not the leader of a participating party, also after consultation with the leader of that Minister’s party; or
(b) if it is a Minister referred to in section 91 (1) (b), after consultation with the Executive Deputy Presidents and the leaders of the participating parties.’
‘132 Executive Councils
(1) The Executive Council of a province consists of the Premier and not more than 10 members appointed by the Premier in accordance with this section.
(2) A party holding at least 10 per cent of the seats in a provincial legislature and which has decided to participate in the government of national unity, is entitled to be allocated one or more of the Executive Council portfolios in proportion to the number of seats held by it in the legislature relative to the number of seats held by the other participating parties.
(3) Executive Council portfolios must be allocated to the respective participating parties according to the same formula set out in section 91 (9), and in applying that formula a reference in that section to-
(a) the Cabinet, must be read as a reference to an Executive Council;
(b) a Minister, must be read as a reference to a member of an Executive Council; and
(c) the National Assembly, must be read as a reference to the provincial legislature.
(4) The Premier of a province after consultation with the leaders of the participating parties must-
(a) determine the specific portfolios to be allocated to the respective participating parties in accordance with the number of portfolios allocated to them in terms of subsection (3);
(b) appoint in respect of each such portfolio a member of the provincial legislature who is a member of the party to which that portfolio was allocated under paragraph (a), as the member of the Executive Council responsible for that portfolio;
(c) if it becomes necessary for the purposes of the Constitution or in the interest of good government, vary any determination under paragraph (a), subject to subsection (3);
(d) terminate any appointment under paragraph (b)-
(i) if the Premier is requested to do so by the leader of the party of which the Executive Council member in question is a member; or
(ii) if it becomes necessary for the purposes of the Constitution or in the interest of good government;
(e) fill, when necessary, subject to paragraph (b), a vacancy in the office of a member of the Executive Council.
(5) Subsection (4) must be implemented in the spirit embodied in the concept of a government of national unity, and the Premier and the other functionaries concerned must in the implementation of that subsection seek to achieve consensus at all times: Provided that if consensus cannot be achieved on-
(a) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (a), (c) or (d) (ii) of that subsection, the Premier’s decision prevails;
(b) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (b), (d) (i) or (e) of that subsection affecting a person who is not a member of the Premier’s party, the decision of the leader of the party of which such person is a member prevails; and
(c) the exercise of a power referred to in paragraph (b) or (e) of that subsection affecting a person who is a member of the Premier’s party, the Premier’s decision prevails.
(6) If any determination of portfolio allocations is varied under subsection (4) (c), the affected members must vacate their portfolios but are eligible, where applicable, for reappointment to other portfolios allocated to their respective parties in terms of the varied determination.
(7) Meetings of an Executive Council must be presided over by the Premier of the province.
(8) An Executive Council must function in a manner which gives consideration to the consensus-seeking spirit embodied in the concept of a government of national unity, as well as the need for effective government.’
‘(3) Members of Executive Councils are accountable individually to the Premier and to the provincial legislature for the administration of their portfolios, and all members of the Executive Council are correspondingly accountable collectively for the performance of the functions of the provincial government and for its policies.
(4) Members of Executive Councils must administer their portfolios in accordance with the policy determined by the Council.
(5) If a member of an Executive Council fails to administer the portfolio in accordance with the policy of the Council, the Premier may require the member concerned to bring the administration of the portfolio into conformity with that policy.
(6) If the member concerned fails to comply with a requirement of the Premier under subsection (5), the Premier may remove the member from office after consultation with the member, and if the member is not a member of the Premier’s party or is not the leader of a participating party, also after consultation with the leader of that member’s party.’
‘(1) Subject to the directions of the Minister of Safety and Security, the National Commissioner shall be responsible for-’;
‘(b) the appointment of provincial commissioners;’;
‘(d) the investigation and prevention of organised crime or crime which requires national investigation and prevention or specialised skills;’; and
‘(k) the establishment and maintenance of a national public order policing unit to be deployed in support of and at the request of the Provincial Commissioner;.’
‘(1) Subject to section 218 (1), a Provincial Commissioner shall be responsible for-.’
‘Provided that this subsection shall also apply to members of any armed force which submitted its personnel list after the commencement of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1993 (Act 200 of 1993), but before the adoption of the new constitutional text as envisaged in section 73 of that Constitution, if the political organisation under whose authority and control it stands or with which it is associated and whose objectives it promotes did participate in the Transitional Executive Council or did take part in the first election of the National Assembly and the provincial legislatures under the said Constitution.’
‘(2) The National Defence Force shall exercise its powers and perform its functions solely in the national interest in terms of Chapter 11 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996.’
‘(1) A public service, department of state, administration or security service which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the new Constitution’), performed governmental functions, continues to function in terms of the legislation applicable to it until it is abolished or incorporated or integrated into any appropriate institution or is rationalised or consolidated with any other institution.’;
‘(6) (a) The President may appoint a commission to review the conclusion or amendment of a contract, the appointment or promotion, or the award of a term or condition of service or other benefit, which occurred between 27 April 1993 and 30 September 1994 in respect of any person referred to in subsection (2) or any class of such persons.
(b) The commission may reverse or alter a contract, appointment, promotion or award if not proper or justifiable in the circumstances of the case.’; and
‘(a) The rationalisation of all institutions referred to in section 236 (1), excluding military forces referred to in section 224 (2), shall after the commencement of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 1996, continue, with a view to establishing-
(i) an effective administration in the national sphere of government to deal with matters within the jurisdiction of the national sphere; and
(ii) an effective administration for each province to deal with matters within the jurisdiction of each provincial government.’; and
‘(i) institutions referred to in section 236 (1), excluding military forces, shall rest with the national government, which shall exercise such responsibility in co-operation with the provincial governments;.’
‘(4) Subject to and in accordance with any applicable law, the assets, rights, duties and liabilities of all forces referred to in section 224 (2) shall devolve upon the National Defence Force in accordance with the directions of the Minister of Defence.’
[Repealed]
[Repealed]
Number and Year of Law / Title:
Act 2 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Act, 1994
Act 3 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second Amendment Act, 1994
Act 13 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment Act, 1994
Act 14 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Fourth Amendment Act, 1994
Act 24 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Sixth Amendment Act, 1994
Act 29 of 1994 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Fifth Amendment Act, 1994
Act 20 of 1995 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Act, 1995
Act 44 of 1995 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Second Amendment Act, 1995
Act 7 of 1996 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Amendment Act, 1996
Act 26 of 1996 / Constitution of the Republic of South Africa Third Amendment Act, 1996
