We, the People of South Sudan,
Grateful to the Almighty God for giving the people of South Sudan the wisdom and courage to determine their destiny and future through a free, transparent and peaceful referendum in accordance with the provisions of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, 2005;
Recalling our long and heroic struggle for justice, freedom, equality and dignity in South Sudan;
Remembering and inspired by the selfless sacrifices of our martyrs, heroes and heroines;
Dedicated to a genuine national healing process and the building of trust and confidence in our society through dialogue;
Determined to lay the foundation for a united, peaceful and prosperous society based on justice, equality, respect for human rights and the rule of law;
Committed to establishing a decentralized democratic multi-party system of governance in which power shall be peacefully transferred and to upholding values of human dignity and equal rights and duties of men and women;
Conscious of the need to manage our natural resources sustainably and efficiently for the benefit of the present and future generations and to eradicate poverty and attain the Millennium Development Goals;
Do hereby, through this Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly, amend the Interim Constitution of Southern Sudan, 2005, which shall be adopted and hereafter referred to as the “Transitional Constitution of the Republic of South Sudan, 2011,” and shall be the supreme law by which the independent and sovereign South Sudan shall be governed during the Transitional Period, and undertake to abide by, respect and defend it.
Sovereignty is vested in the people and shall be exercised by the State through its democratic and representative institutions established by this Constitution and the law.
The sources of legislation in South Sudan shall be:
The flag, emblem, national anthem, coat of arms, public seal, medals, festivals and commemorations of the State shall be prescribed by law.
Subject to Article 190 herein, no derogation from the rights and freedoms enshrined in this Bill shall be made. The Bill of Rights shall be upheld, protected and applied by the Supreme Court and other competent courts; the Human Rights Commission shall monitor its application in accordance with this Constitution and the law.
Every person has the inherent right to life, dignity and the integrity of his or her person which shall be protected by law; no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life.
Every person has the right to liberty and security of person; no person shall be subjected to arrest, detention, deprivation or restriction of his or her liberty except for specified reasons and in accordance with procedures prescribed by law.
All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law without discrimination as to race, ethnic origin, colour, sex, language, religious creed, political opinion, birth, locality or social status.
Every person of marriageable age shall have the right to marry a person of the opposite sex and to found a family according to their respective family laws, and no marriage shall be entered into without the free and full consent of the man and woman intending to marry.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The right to litigation shall be guaranteed for all persons; no person shall be denied the right to resort to courts of law to redress grievances whether against government or any individual or organization.
The privacy of all persons shall be inviolable; no person shall be subjected to interference with his or her private life, family, home or correspondence, save in accordance with the law.
The following religious rights are guaranteed by this Constitution:
All levels of government shall promote public health, establish, rehabilitate and develop basic medical and diagnostic institutions and provide free primary health care and emergency services for all citizens.
Every citizen has the right of access to official information and records, including electronic records in the possession of any level of government or any organ or agency thereof, except where the release of such information is likely to prejudice public security or the right to privacy of any other person.
Ethnic and cultural communities shall have the right to freely enjoy and develop their particular cultures. Members of such communities shall have the right to practice their beliefs, use their languages, observe their religions and raise their children within the context of their respective cultures and customs in accordance with this Constitution and the law.
All levels of government shall:
Foreign policy of the Republic of South Sudan shall serve the national interest and shall be conducted independently and transparently with the view to achieving the following:
Unless this Constitution otherwise provides or a duly enacted law guarantees, the rights and liberties described and the provisions contained in this Chapter are not by themselves enforceable in a court of law; however, the principles expressed herein are basic to governance and the State shall be guided by them, especially in making policies and laws.
South Sudan shall have a decentralized system of government with the following levels:
The National Government shall have the following organs:
The National Government shall exercise exclusive legislative and executive authority on all functional areas in Schedule A; it shall also exercise legislative and executive authority on all concurrent and residual matters as set forth in Schedules C and D read together with Schedule E herein.
The National Legislative Assembly shall exercise the following powers and functions:
The Council of States shall consist of:
The Council of States shall be competent to:
While sitting separately to transact business that falls within its competences, each House shall observe the following rules:
To assume his or her functions, every member of the National Legislative Assembly or the Council of States shall take the following oath before the appropriate House:
“I…….......…....., as a Member of the National Legislative Assembly/Council of States, do hereby swear by Almighty God /solemnly affirm/ that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Republic of South Sudan and its people; that I will obey and respect the Constitution and abide by the law; and that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties and responsibilities as a member of the National Legislative Assembly/Council of States and serve the people of the Republic of South Sudan to the best of my ability, so help me God/ God is my witness.”
The sittings of the National Legislature or either of its two Houses shall be open to the public; its proceedings shall be published and may also be broadcast. However, the National Legislature or either House may decide according to its Conduct of Business Regulations that certain deliberations take place in camera.
Resolutions of the National Legislature or either of its two Houses shall, whenever possible, be taken by unanimity or consensus. Alternatively, resolutions shall be passed by simple majority of those present and voting, save in cases where this Constitution provides otherwise.
Members of the National Legislature or either of its two Houses shall freely and responsibly express their opinions, subject only to the provisions of the regulations of the appropriate House. No legal proceedings shall be initiated against any member, nor shall he or she be held accountable before any court of law merely by reason of views or opinions that he or she might have expressed in the course of performing his or her duties.
The President may personally or by a message, address the National Legislature or either of its two Houses. The National Legislature or either of its two Houses shall accord priority to such request over any other business. The President may also request the opinion of the National Legislature or either of its two Houses on any subject matter.
Members of the National Legislative Assembly or the Council of States may, in either House, within the competences of the concerned House and subject to its Conduct of Business Regulations, address questions to a Minister of the National Government on any subject relating to his or her duties; the said Minister shall provide the appropriate House with a prompt reply.
The National Legislative Assembly or the Council of States may request a Minister of the National Government to deliver before it a statement on any matter of public concern.
The National Legislature or either of its two Houses may, by law, delegate to the President, the Council of Ministers or any public body, the power to make any subsidiary regulations, rules, orders or any other subsidiary instrument having the force of law, provided that such subsidiary legislation shall be tabled before the concerned House and be subject to adoption or amendment by a resolution of that House in accordance with the provisions of its regulations.
No court or any other authority shall call into question the validity of any proceedings of the National Legislature or any of its two Houses on the basis of violation of its Conduct of Business Regulations. A certificate duly signed by the appropriate Speaker shall be deemed to be conclusive evidence of the validity of the said proceedings.
There shall be established in the Republic of South Sudan a National Executive consisting of the President, Vice President, Ministers, and Deputy Ministers.
The Executive shall exercise the executive powers on all matters as set forth in Schedules A, C and D read together with Schedule E of this Constitution and any other competence conferred upon it by this Constitution and the law.
A candidate for the office of the President shall:
The President of the Republic of South Sudan shall, before assuming office, take the following oath before the public:
“I……….…………., do hereby swear by the Almighty God /solemnly affirm, that as the President of the Republic of South Sudan, I shall be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of South Sudan and shall diligently and honestly discharge my duties and responsibilities in a consultative manner to foster the development and welfare of the people of South Sudan; that I shall obey, preserve and defend the Constitution and abide by the law; and that I shall protect and promote the unity of the people of South Sudan and consolidate the democratic decentralized system of government and preserve the integrity and dignity of the people of South Sudan; so help me God/ God is my witness.”
The President shall perform the following functions:
The Vice President shall perform the following functions:
The office of the Vice President shall fall vacant in any of the following cases:
“I……….…………., do hereby swear by the Almighty God /solemnly affirm/, that as a Presidential Advisor, I shall be faithful and bear true faith and allegiance to South Sudan and shall diligently and honestly discharge my duties and responsibilities and strive to foster the development and welfare of its people; that I shall obey, preserve and defend the Constitution and abide by the law; and that I shall protect and promote the unity of the people of South Sudan and consolidate the democratic decentralized system of government and preserve the integrity and dignity of the people of South Sudan; so help me God/ God is my witness.”
The National Council of Ministers shall have the following functions:
Deliberations of the National Council of Ministers shall be confidential; no Minister shall disclose, communicate or reveal such deliberations save by permission of the Council of Ministers.
To assume office, a national Minister shall, before the President, take the same oath of a Presidential Advisor as prescribed in Article 107 (2) of this Constitution.
Any person aggrieved by an act of the National Council of Ministers or a National Minister may contest such act before:
The office of a Minister or Deputy Minister of the National Government shall fall vacant in any of the following cases:
The President and Vice President, Presidential Advisors, Ministers, and Deputy Ministers of the National Government, Governors, state Advisors, state Ministers and other constitutional office holders shall be paid such emoluments and other remuneration and, on leaving office, receive such benefits as shall be regulated by law.
The Judiciary shall be structured as follows:
The Supreme Court shall be the highest court and shall consist of the Chief Justice, a Deputy Chief Justice and not less than nine other Justices.
The Deputy Chief Justice shall:
There shall be a code of conduct for the national armed forces that shall:
National security shall:
There shall be established a national petroleum and gas corporation which shall participate in the upstream, midstream and downstream activities of the petroleum and gas sector on behalf of the National Government. Its structure, management, and functions shall be determined by law.
The above allocations shall be regulated by law.
The states shall legislate for raising revenue or collecting taxes from the following sources:
During a state of emergency, the President may, by law or orders, take any measures that shall not derogate from the provisions of this Constitution except as provided herein:
The duration of the measures relating to the state of emergency shall expire in the following cases:
The National Government shall during the Transitional Period conduct a population census the outcome of which shall, inter alia, determine the number of electoral constituencies for the next general elections.
Whoever runs in any election shall respect and abide by this Constitution and the law.
This Constitution shall be assented to and signed by the President of the Government of Southern Sudan, and shall come into force on July 9, 2011.
This Constitution shall not be amended unless the proposed amendment is approved by two-thirds of all members of each House of the National Legislature sitting separately and only after introduction of the draft amendment at least one month prior to the deliberations.
All current Laws of Southern Sudan shall remain in force and all current institutions shall continue to perform their functions and duties, unless new actions are taken in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
*The Transitional Constitution of South Sudan, 2011 (Amendment) Act, 2013:
The mandate and tenure of the Commission is hereby extended for a period beginning from 10th January, 2013 to 31st December, 2014. Upon completion of its work the Commission shall be considered dissolved.
*The Transitional Constitution of South Sudan, 2011 (Amendment) Act, 2013:
The Commission shall adopt and present the Draft Constitutional Text and an Explanatory Note to the President within a period not extending beyond 31st December, 2014.
*The Transitional Constitution of South Sudan, 2011 (Amendment) Act, 2013:
The President, within three months of receiving the Draft Constitutional Text and Explanatory Note from the National Constitutional Review Commission shall present the same to the Constitutional Conference as established below for deliberation.
*The Transitional Constitution of South Sudan, 2011 (Amendment) Act, 2013:
The President shall, within three months of the receipt of the Draft Constitutional Text from the Constitutional Conference, cause the same to be tabled before the National Legislature for deliberation and adoption within twelve months.
The exclusive legislative and executive powers of the National Government shall be as follows:
The exclusive executive and legislative powers of a state shall be as follows:
The National and state governments shall have legislative and executive competences on any of the matters listed below:
Residual powers shall be dealt with according to their nature. If the power pertains to a national matter, requires a national standard, or is a matter which cannot be regulated by a single state, it shall be exercised by the National Government. If the power pertains to a matter that is usually exercised by the state or local government, it shall be exercised by the state or local government.
If there is a contradiction between the provisions of National law and a state law on the matters that are concurrent, the National law shall prevail to the extent of the contradiction.
