The PEOPLE OF SRI LANKA having, by their Mandate freely expressed and granted on the Sixth day of the waxing moon in the month of Adhi Nikini in the year Two Thousand Five Hundred and Twenty one of the Buddhist Era (being Thursday the Twenty first day of the month of July in the year One Thousand Nine Hundred and Seventy seven), entrusted to and empowered their Representatives elected on that day to draft, adopt and operate a new Republican Constitution in order to achieve the goals of a DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, and having solemnly resolved by the grant of such Mandate and the confidence reposed in their said Representatives who were elected by an overwhelming majority, to constitute SRI LANKA into a DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC whilst ratifying the immutable republican principles of REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY and assuring to all peoples FREEDOM, EQUALITY, JUSTICE, FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS and the INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY as the intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well-being of succeeding generations of the People of SRI LANKA and of all the people of the World, who come to share with those generations the effort of working for the creation and preservation of a JUSTAND FREE SOCIETY:
WE, THE FREELY ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PEOPLE OF SRI LANKA, in pursuance of such Mandate, humbly acknowledging our obligations to our People and gratefully remembering their heroic and unremitting struggle to regain and preserve their rights and privileges so that the Dignity and Freedom of the Individual may be assured, Just, Social, Economic and Cultural Order attained, the Unity of the Country restored, and Concord established with other Nations,
do hereby adopt and enact
this
CONSTITUTION
as the
SUPREME LAW
of the
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA.
Sri Lanka (Ceylon) is a Free, Sovereign, Independent and Democratic Socialist Republic and shall be known as the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.
The Republic of Sri Lanka is a Unitary State.
In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable. Sovereignty includes the powers of government, fundamental rights and the franchise.
The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the following manner:–
The territory of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall consist of the twenty-five administrative districts, the names of which are set out in the First Schedule and its territorial waters:
Provided that such administrative districts may be subdivided or amalgamated so as to constitute different administrative districts, as Parliament may by resolution determine.
The National Flag of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be the Lion Flag depicted in the Second Schedule.
The National Anthem of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be “Sri Lanka Matha”, the words and music of which are set out in the Third Schedule.
The National Day of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be the fourth day of February.
Every person is entitled to freedom of thought, conscience and religion, including the freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Provided that it shall be lawful to require a person to acquire within a reasonable time sufficient knowledge of any language as a qualification for any employment or office in the Public, Judicial or Local Government Service or in the service of any Public Corporation, where such knowledge is reasonably necessary for the discharge of the duties of such employment or office:
Provided further that it shall be lawful to require a person to have a sufficient knowledge of any language as a qualification for any such employment or office where no function of that employment or office can be discharged otherwise than with a knowledge of that language.
Provided that the burden of proving particular facts may, by law, be placed on an accused person.
Nothing in this Article shall prejudice the trial and punishment of any person for any act or omission which, at the time when it was committed, was criminal according to the general principles of law recognized by the community of nations.
It shall not be contravention of this Article to require the imposition of a minimum penalty for an offence provided that such penalty does not exceed the maximum penalty prescribed for such offence at the time such offence was committed.
Every person shall be entitled to apply to the Supreme Court, as provided by Article 126, in respect of the infringement or imminent infringement, by executive or administrative action, of a fundamental right to which such person is entitled under the provisions of this Chapter.
The National Languages of Sri Lanka shall be Sinhala and Tamil.
A Member of Parliament or a member of a Provincial Council or a Local Authority shall be entitled to perform his duties and discharge his functions in Parliament or in such Provincial Council or Local Authority in either of the National Languages.
Provided that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an institution of higher education where the medium of instruction is a language other than a National Language.
Provided that compliance with the preceding provisions of this paragraph shall not be obligatory if such other National Language is the medium of instruction for or in any like course, department or faculty either at any other campus or branch of such University or of any other like University.
Provided that the President may, having regard to the proportion which the Sinhala or Tamil linguistic minority population in any unit comprising a division of an Assistant Government Agent, bears to the total population of that area, direct that both Sinhala and Tamil or a language other than the language used as the language of administration in the province in which such area may be situated, be used as the language of administration for such area.
Provided, however, that a Provincial Council, Local Authority, Public Institution or any official receiving communications from transacting business with any other or Provincial Council, Local Authority, Public Institution or an official functioning in an area in which a different language is used as the Language of administration shall be entitled to receive communications from and to communicate and transact business in English.
Provided that a person may be required to have a sufficient knowledge of Sinhala or Tamil, as a condition for admission to any such service or public institution where no function of the office or employment for which he is recruited can be discharged otherwise than with a sufficient knowledge of such language.
“Public Institution” means a department or institution of the Government, a public corporation or statutory institution.
Provided that Parliament shall, at the stage of enactment of any law determine which text shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency between texts:
Provided further that in respect of all other written laws and the text in which such written laws was enacted or adopted or made, shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency between such texts.
Provided that the Minister in charge of the subject of Justice may, with the concurrence of the cabinet of Ministers direct that the record of any court shall also be maintained and the proceedings conducted in a language other than the language of the court;
"Judge” includes the President, Chairman, Presiding Officer and member of any court; and
“Record” includes Pleadings, Judgments, Orders and Other judicial and Ministerial acts.
The State shall provide adequate facilities for the use of the languages provided for in this Chapter.
In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of any law and the provisions of this Chapter, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
Provided that the provisions of sections 23 and 24 of that Act shall also be applicable to a person who became entitled to the status of a citizen of Sri Lanka by virtue of registration under the provisions of section 11, 12 or 13 of that Act.
The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms are inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations and accordingly it is the duty of every person in Sri Lanka –
The provisions of this Chapter do not confer or impose legal rights or obligations and are not enforceable in any court or tribunal. No question of inconsistency with such provisions shall be raised in any court or tribunal.
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the Speaker shall act in the office of President.
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 40 –
Provided that the President in office, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Article 30, shall continue to exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office of President until the assumption of office by the person declared elected as President. If the office of President becomes vacant, by reason of the person declared elected as President failing to assume office, the President in office shall continue to exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office of President, until the Prime Minister or if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or if the Prime Minister be unable to act, the Speaker commences to act in the office of President in terms of Article 40;
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the Speaker shall act in the office of President.
The President shall be responsible to Parliament for the due exercise, performance and discharge of his powers, duties and functions under the Constitution and any written law, including the law for the time being relating to public security.
Provided that where any offender shall have been condemned to suffer death by the sentence of any court, the President shall cause a report to be made to him by the Judge who tried the case and shall forward such report to the Attorney-General with instructions that after the Attorney-General has advised thereon, the report shall be sent together with the Attorney-General’s advice to the Minister in charge of the subject of Justice, who shall forward the report with his recommendation to the President.
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall be read and construed as restricting the right of any person to make an application under Article 126 against the Attorney-General, in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by the President, in his official capacity:
Provided further that the Supreme Court shall have no jurisdiction to pronounce upon the exercise of the powers of the President under Article 33(2)(g).
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the President may appoint the Speaker to exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office of president during such period.
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the Speaker shall exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the office of President during such period.
For the purposes of Article 38(1)(d), the date of commencement of the term of office of the new President shall be the date of his election or the date of the determination, as the case may be.
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the Speaker shall act in the office of the President.
Provided that if such vacancy occurs after the dissolution of Parliament, the President shall be elected by the new Parliament within one month of its first meeting.
Provided that if the office of Prime Minister be then vacant or the Prime Minister is unable to act, the Speaker shall act in the office of President.
Provided that any such Secretary, officer or member of the staff who immediately prior to his appointment as Secretary, officer or member of the staff was in the Public or Local Government Service or in the service of a public corporation shall be entitled to revert to such service without loss of seniority upon a new President assuming office.
with effect from the date of expiry of such period.
Provided that no person shall be appointed to act in any such office for successive periods not exceeding fourteen days, unless such acting appointment has been approved by the Council on a recommendation by the President.
Notwithstanding the expiration of the term of office of the members of the Council or of the members of any Commission specified in the Schedule to Article 41B, the members of the Council or of such other Commission shall continue in office until the assumption of office by the new members of the Council or of such other Commission.
The expenses incurred by the Council shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
Subject to the provisions of Article 126, no court shall have the power or jurisdiction to entertain, hear or decide or call in question, on any ground whatsoever, or in any manner whatsoever, any decision of the Council or any approval or recommendation made by the Council, which decision, approval or recommendation shall be final and conclusive for all purposes.
Provided that if after the Prime Minister so ceases to hold office, Parliament is dissolved, the Cabinet of Ministers shall continue to function with the other Ministers of the Cabinet as its members, until the conclusion of the General Election. The President may appoint one such Minister to exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions of the Prime Minister, and the provisions of Article 47 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Whenever a Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister who is not a members of the Cabinet of Ministers or a Deputy Minister is unable to discharge the functions of his office, the President may, on the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any Member of Parliament to act in the place of such Minister of the Cabinet of Ministers, Minister who is not a member of the Cabinet of Ministers or a Deputy Minister.
Every person appointed to any office referred to in this Chapter shall not enter upon the duties of his office until he takes and subscribes the oath, or makes and subscribes the affirmation, set out in the Fourth Schedule and Seventh Schedule.
Provided that any such person shall, until he ceases to be a member of the Public Service Commission, or while continuing to be a member, attains the age at which he would, if he were a public officer or a judicial officer, as the case may be, be required to retire, be deemed to be a public officer or a judicial officer and to hold a pensionable office in the service of the State, for the purpose of any provision relating to the grant of pensions, gratuities and other allowances in respect of such service.
Upon delegation of any of its powers to a Committee or a public officer appointed under Article 56 or Article 57 as the case may be, the Commission shall not, while such delegation is in force, exercise or perform its functions or duties in regard to the categories of public officers in respect of which such delegation is made, subject to the provisions contained in paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 58.
Subject to the provisions of Article 59 and of Article 126, no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner call in question any order or decision made by the Commission, a Committee, or any public officer, in pursuance of any power or duty conferred or imposed on such Commission, or delegated to a Committee or public officer, under this Chapter or under any other law.
Until the Commission otherwise provides, all rules, regulations and procedures relating to the public service as are in force on the date of the coming into operation of this Chapter, shall, mutatis mutandis, be deemed to continue in force as rules, regulations and procedures relating to the public service, as if they had been made or provided for under this Chapter.
A person appointed to any office referred to in this Chapter shall not enter upon the duties of his office until he takes and subscribes the oath or makes and subscribes the affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
For the purposes of this Chapter “public officer” does not include a member of the Army, Navy, or Air Force, an officer of the Election Commission appointed by such Commission, a police officer appointed by the National Police Commission, a scheduled public officer appointed by the Judicial Service Commission or a member of the Sri Lanka State Audit Service appointed by the Audit Service Commission.
Except for the purpose of electing the Speaker, no Member shall sit or vote in parliament until he has taken and subscribed the following oath, or made and subscribed the following affirmation, before Parliament:–
“I …… do [solemnly declare and affirm/swear] that I will uphold and defend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.”
The seat of a Member shall become vacant –
The privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and of its Members may be determined and regulated by Parliament by law and until so determined and regulated, the provisions of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in its membership and its proceedings shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that a person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
Provided that the President shall not dissolve Parliament until the expiration of a period of not less than four years and six months from the date appointed for its first meeting, unless Parliament requests the President to do so by a resolution passed by not less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members (including those not present), voting in its favour.
Provided that, at any time while Parliament stands prorogued, the President may by Proclamation-
Parliament may adjourn from time to time as it may determine by resolution or Standing Order, until it is prorogued or dissolved.
If at any time during a meeting of Parliament the attention of the person presiding is drawn to the fact that there are fewer than twenty Members present, the person presiding shall, subject to any Standing Order, adjourn the sitting without question put.
Parliament shall have power to make laws, including laws having retrospective effect and repealing or amending any provision of the Constitution, or adding any provision to the Constitution:
Provided that Parliament shall not make any law—
In sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph, “law” includes existing law.
Provided that in the case of an amendment proposed to a Bill in Parliament, the Attorney-General shall communicate his opinion to the Speaker at the stage when the Bill is ready to be put to Parliament for its acceptance.
The Speaker shall endorse on every Bill passed by Parliament a certificate in the following form:-
“This Bill (here state the short title of the Bill) has been duly passed by Parliament.”
Such certificate may also state the majority by which such Bill was passed:
Provided that where by virtue of the provisions of Article or Article 83 or Article 84 or Article 123 (2) a special majority is required for the passing of a Bill, the Speaker shall certify such Bill only if such Bill has been passed with such special majority:
Provided further that where by virtue of Article 83, the Bill or any provision thereof requires the approval of the People at a Referendum, such certificate shall further state that the Bill or such provision shall not become law until approved by the People at a Referendum.
“This Bill/provision has been duly approved by the People at a Referendum.”
No such certificate shall be endorsed by the President on a Bill –
Every such certificate shall be final and conclusive, and shall not be called in question in any court.
Where a Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry consists of more than one member, a recommendation made by the majority of such members, in case of any difference of opinion, shall be, and shall be deemed for all purposes to be, the recommendation of such Commission of Inquiry.
"This resolution has been duly passed by Parliament in accordance with the provisions of Article 81 of the Constitution."
Every such certificate shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be questioned in any court, and no court or tribunal shall inquire into, or pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the validity of such resolution on any ground whatsoever.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the pro­visions of Article 82—
shall become law if the number of votes cast in favour thereof amounts to not less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members (including those not present), is approved by the People at a Referendum and a certificate is endorsed thereon by the President in accordance with Article 80.
Provided that when the total number of valid votes cast does not exceed two-thirds of the whole number of electors entered in the register of electors, such Bill shall be deemed to be approved only if approved by not less than one-third of the whole number of such electors.
The President may, subject to the provisions of Article 85, submit to the People by Referendum any matter which in the opinion of the President is of national importance.
Every person shall, unless disqualified as hereinafter provided, be qualified to be an elector at the election of the President and of the Members of Parliament or to vote at any Referendum:
Provided that no such person shall be entitled to vote unless his name is entered in the appropriate register of electors.
No person shall be qualified to be an elector at an election of the President, or of the Members of Parliament or to vote at any Referendum, if he is subject to any of the following disqualifications, namely –
Provided that if any person disqualified under this paragraph is granted a free pardon such disqualification shall cease from the date on which the pardon is granted;
Every person who is qualified to be an elector shall be qualified to be elected as a Member of Parliament unless he is disqualified under the provisions of Article 91.
Every person who is qualified to be an elector shall be qualified to be elected to the office of President unless he is subject to any of the following disqualifications –
The voting for the election of the President of the Republic and of the Members of Parliament and at any Referendum shall be free, equal and by secret ballot.
and the candidate who receives the majority of the votes so counted shall be declared elected as President.
then the determination of the candidate to whom such additional vote shall be deemed to have been given for the purpose of such determination shall be made by lot.
The President shall by Proclamation publish the names and boundaries of the electoral districts and the number of members, which each such electoral district is entitled to return by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (4) of Article 96 in accordance with the decision of the Delimitation Commission. The electoral districts specified in the Proclamation shall come into operation at the next ensuing General Election of Members of Parliament and shall thereafter be the electoral districts of Sri Lanka for all the purposes of the Constitution and of any law for the time being in force relating to the election of Members of Parliament.
Provided that in the case of the expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat shall not become vacant if prior to the expiration of the said period of one month he applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing, and the Supreme Court upon such application determines that such expulsion was invalid. Such petition shall be inquired into by three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall make their determination within two months of the filing of such petition. Where the Supreme Court determines that the expulsion was valid the vacancy shall occur from the date of such determination.
After the one hundred and ninety six members referred to in Article 98 have been declared elected at a General Election of Members of Parliament, the Commissioner of Elections shall forthwith apportion the balance twenty nine seats among the recognized political parties and independent groups contesting such General Election in the same proportion as the proportion which the number of votes polled by each such party or group at such General Election bears to the total number of votes polled at such General Election and for the purposes of such apportionment, the provisions of paragraphs (4), (5), (6) and (7) of Article 98 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply.
Every recognised political party or independent group contesting a General Election shall submit to the Commissioner of Elections within the nomination period specified for such election a list of persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament, from which it may nominate persons to fill the seats, if any, which such party or group will be entitled to, on such apportionment. The Commissioner of Elections shall cause every list submitted to him under this Article to be published forthwith in the Gazette and in one Sinhala, Tamil and English newspaper upon the expiry of the nomination period.
Where a recognized political party or independent group is entitled to a seat under the apportionment referred to above, the Commissioner of Elections shall by a notice, require the Secretary of such recognized political party or group leader of such independent group to nominate within one week of such notice, persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament (being persons whose names are included in the list submitted to the Commissioner of Elections under this Article or in any nomination paper submitted in respect of any electoral district by such party or group at that election) to fill such seats and shall declare elected as Members of Parliament, the persons so nominated.
The Commissioner of Elections shall before issuing the aforesaid notice determine whether the number of members belonging to any community, ethnic or otherwise, elected to Parliament under Article 98 is commensurate with the national population ratio and request the Secretary of such recognized political party or group leader of such independent group in so nominating persons to be elected as Members of Parliament to ensure as far as practicable, that the representation of all communities is commensurate with its national population ratio.
For the purposes of this Article the number of votes polled at a General Election shall be deemed to be the number of votes actually counted and shall not include any votes rejected as void.
Any person who-
knowing or having reasonable grounds for knowing that he was so disqualified or that his seat has become vacant, as the case may be, shall be liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees for every day upon which he so sits or votes to be recovered as a debt due to the Republic by an action instituted by the Attorney-General in the District Court of Colombo.
Provided that no such law shall add to the disqualifications specified in Articles 89 and 91.
When a public officer or an officer of a public corporation is a candidate at any election, be shall be deemed to be on leave from the date on which he stands nominated as a candidate until the conclusion of the election. Such a public officer or an officer of a public corporation shall not during such period exercise, perform or discharge any of the powers, duties or functions of his office.
Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under paragraph (1) of Article 126, Article 104H and Article 130 and on the Court of Appeal by Article 144 and the jurisdiction conferred on any court by any law to hear and determine election petitions or Referendum petitions–
by the Constitution, and by the law for the time being relating to the election of the President, the election of Members of Parliament, the election of members of Provincial Councils, the election of members of Local Authorities and the conduct of Referenda, including but not limited to all the powers, duties and functions relating to the preparation and revision of registers of electors for the purposes of such elections and Referenda and the conduct of such elections and Referenda.
by a direction in writing by the Chairman of the Commission or of the Commissioner-General of Elections on the instruction of the Commission.
It shall be lawful for the Commission, upon the making of an Order for the holding of an election or the making of a Proclamation requiring the conduct of a Referendum, as the case may be, to make recommendations to the President regarding the deployment of the armed forces of the Republic for the prevention or control of any actions or incidents which may be prejudicial to the holding or conducting of a free and fair election or Referendum, as the case may be.
All public officers performing duties and functions at any election or Referenda shall act in the performance and discharge of such duties and functions under the directions of the Commission and shall be responsible and answerable to the Commission therefor.
shall be guilty of an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both such fine and imprisonment.
In this Chapter “during the period of an election” shall mean the period commencing on the making of a Proclamation or Order for the conduct of a Referendum or for the holding of an election, as the case may be, and ending on the date on which the result of poll taken at such Referendum or election, as the case may be, is declared.
Provided that the preceding provisions of this Article shall not prejudice or affect the rights now or hereafter vested by any law in such other court, tribunal or institution to punish for contempt of itself.
In this paragraph the expressions "bhikku" and "temple" shall have the same meanings as in the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, as at the commencement of the Constitution.
exclude therefrom such persons as are not directly interested in the proceedings therein.
Provided that no resolution for the presentation of such an address shall be entertained by the Speaker or placed on the Order Paper of Parliament, unless notice of such resolution is signed by not less than one-third of the total number of Members of Parliament and sets out full particulars of the alleged misbehaviour or incapacity.
There shall be a Fiscal, who shall be the Fiscal for the whole Island and who shall exercise supervision and control over Deputy Fiscals attached to all Courts of First Instance.
A member of the Commission shall be paid such allowances as may be determined by Parliament. Such allowances shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund and shall not be reduced during the period of office of a member and shall be in addition to the salary and other allowances attached to and received from, the substantive appointment:
Provided that until the amount to be paid as allowances is determined under the provisions of this Article, the members of the Commission shall continue to receive as allowances, such amount as they were receiving on the day immediately preceding the date on which this Chapter comes into operation.
There shall be a Secretary to the Commission who shall be appointed by the Commission from among senior judicial officers of the Courts of First Instance.
Any judicial officer or scheduled public officer may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairman of the Commission.
No suit or proceeding shall lie against the Chairman, Member or Secretary or Officer of the Commission for any lawful act which in good faith is done in the performance of his duties or functions as such Chairman, Member, Secretary or Officer of the Commission.
Provided however that the giving of a certificate or testimonial to any applicant or candidate for any judicial office or scheduled public office shall not be an offence.
“Judicial officer” means any person who holds office as judge, presiding officer or member of any Court of First Instance, tribunal or institution created and established for the administration of Justice or for the adjudication of any labour or other dispute, but does not include a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the High Court or a person who performs arbitral functions or a public officer whose principal duty is not the performance of functions of a judicial nature; and
“Scheduled public officer” means the Registrar of the Supreme Court, the Registrar of the Court of Appeal, the Registrar, Deputy Registrar or Assistant Registrar of the High Court or any Court of First Instance, the Fiscal, the Deputy Fiscal of the Court of Appeal or High Court and any Court of First Instance, any public officer employed in the Registry of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal or High Court or any Court of First Instance included in a category specified in the Fifth Schedule or such other categories as may be specified by Order made by the Minister in charge of the subject of Justice and approved by Parliament and published in the Gazette.
The Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka shall be the highest and final superior Court of record in the Republic and shall subject to the provisions of the Constitution exercise –
The Supreme Court shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to determine any question as to whether any Bill or any provision thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution:
Provided that-
and may specify the nature of the amendments which would make the Bill or such provision cease to be inconsistent.
Provided that it shall be lawful for such Bill to be passed after, such amendment as would make the Bill cease to be inconsistent with the Constitution.
Save as otherwise provided in Articles 120 and 121, no court or tribunal created and established for the administration of justice, or other institution, person or body of persons shall in relation to any Bill, have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or pronounce upon, the constitutionality of such Bill or its due compliance with the legislative process, on any ground whatsoever.
Provided that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in every matter or proceedings in which it is satisfied that the question to be decided is of public or general importance.
The Supreme Court shall have the power to hear and determine and make such orders as provided for by law on –
Provided that the hearing and determination of a proceeding relating to the election of the President or the validity of a referendum shall be by at least five Judges of the Supreme Court of whom, unless he otherwise directs, the Chief Justice shall be one.
The Supreme Court shall have according to law the power to take cognizance of and punish any person for the breach of the privileges of Parliament.
Provided that its jurisdiction shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, be ordinarily exercised at all times by not less than three Judges of the Court sitting together as the Supreme Court.
The Registry of the Supreme Court shall be in charge of an officer designated the Registrar of the Supreme Court who shall be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the Chief Justice.
The Court of Appeal shall consist of the President of the Court of Appeal and not less than six and not more than eleven other Judges who shall be appointed as provided in Article 107.
Provided that no judgment, decree or order of any court shall be reversed or varied on account of any error, defect or irregularity, which has not prejudiced the substantial rights of the parties or occasioned a failure of justice.
Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Court of Appeal shall have full power and authority to inspect and examine the records of any Court of First Instance or tribunal or other institution, and grant and issue, according to law, orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto against the judge of any Court of First Instance or tribunal or other institution or any other person:
Provided that Parliament may by law provide that in any such category of cases as may be specified in such law, the jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by the preceding provisions of this Article shall be exercised by the Supreme Court and not by the Court of Appeal.
The Court of Appeal may grant and issue orders in the nature of writs of habeas corpus to bring up before such Court-
and to discharge or remand any person so brought up or otherwise deal with such person according to law:
Provided that it shall be lawful for the Court of Appeal to require the body of such person to be brought up before the most convenient Court of First Instance and to direct the judge of such court to inquire into and report upon the acts of the alleged imprisonment or detention and to make such provision for the interim custody of the body produced as to such court shall seem right; and the Court of Appeal shall upon the receipt of such report, make order to discharge or remand the person so alleged to be imprisoned or detained or otherwise deal with such person according to law, and the Court of First Instance shall conform to, and carry into immediate effect, the order so pronounced or made by the Court of Appeal:
Provided further that if provision be made by law for the exercise by any court, of jurisdiction in respect of the custody and control of minor children, then the Court of Appeal, if satisfied that any dispute regarding the custody of any such minor child may more properly be dealt with by such court, direct the parties to make application in that court in respect of the custody of such minor child.
The Court of Appeal may direct-
The Court of Appeal shall have the power to grant and issue injunctions to prevent any irremediable mischief which might ensure before a party making an application for such injunction could prevent the same by bringing an action in any Court of First Instance:
Provided that it shall not be lawful for the Court of Appeal to grant an injunction to prevent a party to any action in any court from appealing to or prosecuting an appeal to the Court of Appeal or to prevent any party to any action in any court from insisting upon any ground of action, defence or appeal, or to prevent any person from suing or prosecuting in any court, except where such person has instituted two separate actions in two different courts for and in respect of the same cause of action, in which case the Court of Appeal shall have the power to intervene by restraining him from prosecuting one or other of such actions as to it may seem fit.
The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise jurisdiction to try election petitions in respect of the election to the membership of Parliament in terms of any law for the time being applicable in that behalf.
The Court of Appeal may, ex mero motu or on any application made, call for, inspect and examine any record of any Court of First Instance and in the exercise of its revisionary powers may make any order thereon as the interests of justice may require.
Provided however that the Chief Justice may from time to time when he deems it so expedient direct that the Court of Appeal shall hold its sittings and exercise its jurisdiction in any judicial zone or district, specified in the direction.
Provided that –
The Registry of the Court of Appeal shall be in charge of an Officer designated as the Registrar of the Court of Appeal who shall be subject to the supervision, direction and control of the President of the Court of Appeal.
Parliament shall have full control over public finance. No tax, rate or any other levy shall be imposed by any local authority or any other public authority, except by or under the authority of a law passed by Parliament or of any existing law.
may, with the consent of the President, authorize provision to be made therefor by an advance from the Contingencies Fund.
No Bill or motion, authorizing the disposal of, or the imposition of charges upon, the Consolidated Fund or other funds of the Republic, or the imposition of any tax or the repeal, augmentation or reduction of any tax for the time being in force shall be introduced in Parliament except by a Minister, and unless such Bill or motion has been approved either by the Cabinet of Ministers or in such manner as the Cabinet of Ministers may authorize.
Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under Article 126 and to the powers granted to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal under Article 153G, no court or tribunal shall have the power or jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner whatsoever call in question any order or decision made by the Commission, in pursuance of any function assigned on such Commission under this Chapter or under any law.
The costs and expenses of the Commission shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
Any officer of the Sri Lanka State Audit Service who is aggrieved by any order relating to the appointment, promotion or transfer of such officer or any order on a disciplinary matter or dismissal made by the Commission, in respect of such officer, may appeal therefrom to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal established under Article 59, which shall have the power to alter, vary, rescind or confirm any order or decision made by the Commission.
The Commission shall be responsible and answerable to Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the Standing Orders of Parliament for the discharge of its functions and shall forward to Parliament in each calendar year a report of its activities in such year.
and such person or institution shall act under his discretion and control.
if a resolution for the presentation of such address is passed by not less than two-thirds of the whole number of members of the Council (including those not present).
Provided that where the Governor does not agree with the advice of the Board of Ministers in any case and he considers it necessary to do so in the public interest, he may refer that case to the President for orders.
Executive power extending to the matters with respect to which a Provincial Council has power to make statutes shall be exercised by the Governor of the Province for which that Provincial Council is established, either directly or through Ministers of the Board of Ministers, or through officers subordinate to him, in accordance with Article 154F.
A Provincial Council shall, unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution of the Council.
Provided that where more than one-half of the members elected to a Provincial Council are members of one political party, the Governor shall appoint the leader of that political party in the Council, as Chief Minister.
Provided that where on such reference, some but not all the Provincial Councils agree to the passing of a Bill, such Bill shall become law applicable only to the Provinces for which the Provincial Councils agreeing to the Bill have been established, upon such Bill being passed by a majority of the Members of Parliament present and voting.
Explanation: A Proclamation under the Public Security Ordinance declaring that the maintenance of essential supplies and services is threatened or that the security of Sri Lanka or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war, or by external aggression, or by armed rebellion may be made before the actual breakdown of supplies and services, or the actual occurrence of war, or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof:
Provided that where such Proclamation is in operation only in any part of Sri Lanka, the power of the President to give directions under this Article, shall also extend to any Province other than the Province in which the Proclamation is in operation if, and insofar as it is expedient so to do for ensuring the maintenance of essential supplies and services or the security of Sri Lanka.
Where the Governor or any Provincial Council has failed to comply with, or give effect to any directions given to such Governor or such Council under this Chapter of the Constitution, it shall be lawful for the President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the Province cannot carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall authorize the President to assume to himself any of the powers vested in, or exercisable, by any Court.
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when Parliament is dissolved or the dissolution of Parliament takes place during the period of fourteen days referred to in this paragraph but no resolution with respect to such proclamation has been passed by Parliament before the expiration of that period, the proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of fourteen days from the date on which Parliament first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period of fourteen days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by Parliament.
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by Parliament, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked continue in force for a further period of two months from the date on which under this paragraph is, would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation shall in any case remain in force for more than one year:
Provided further that if the dissolution of Parliament takes place during any such period of two months but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by Parliament during the said period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of fourteen days from the date on which Parliament first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said period of fourteen days a Proclamation approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation has been passed by Parliament.
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when Parliament has been dissolved or the dissolution of Parliament takes place during the period of two months referred to in sub-paragraph (c), but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by Parliament before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which Parliament first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by Parliament.
in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List.
Parliament shall by law provide for –
The President may by Order published in the Gazette, take such action, or give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution, as appears to him to be necessary or expedient, for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Chapter, or for the administrative changes necessary therefor, or for the purpose of removing any difficulties.
Provided that if –
then such Proclamation shall expire at the end of ten days after the date on which Parliament shall next meet and sit, unless approved by a resolution at such meeting of Parliament.
Provided that in such event, Parliament shall again be summoned to meet as early as possible thereafter.
Provided that any such person shall, until he ceases to be a member of the Commission, or while continuing to be a member, attains the age at which he would, if he were a public officer or a judicial officer, as the case may be, be required to retire, be deemed to be a public officer or a judicial officer and to hold a pensionable office in the service of the State, for the purpose of any provision relating to the grant of pensions, gratuities and other allowances in respect of such service.
There shall be a Secretary to the Commission and such other officers appointed by the Commission on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Commission.
The costs and expenses of the Commission shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
The Commission shall from time to time, make rules for such matters which require rules to be made. Every such rule shall be published in the Gazette.
Any police officer aggrieved by any order relating to promotion, transfer, or any order on a disciplinary matter or dismissal made by the Commission, in respect of such officer, may appeal therefrom to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal established under Article 59, which shall have the power to alter, vary, rescind or confirm any order or decision made by the Commission.
Until the Commission otherwise provides, all rules, regulations and procedures relating to the Police Force as are in force on the date of the coming into operation of this Article, shall continue to be operative and in force.
The Commission shall be responsible and answerable to Parliament in accordance with the provisions of the Standing Orders of Parliament for the exercise, performance and discharge of its powers, duties and functions and shall forward to Parliament in each calendar year a report of its activities in such year.
shall be guilty of an offence and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
The expenses of the Commission shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.
In this Chapter, “government institution” includes a Ministry, a government department, a public corporation, a local authority, any business or other undertaking vested in the Government and a Company registered or deemed to be registered under the Companies Act, No 7 of 2007, in which the Government, a public corporation or any local authority holds more than fifty per centum of the shares.
Where Parliament by resolution passed by not less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members of Parliament (including those not present) voting in its favour, approves as being essential for the development of the national economy, any Treaty or Agreement between the Government of Sri Lanka and the Government of any foreign State for the promotion and protection of the investments in Sri Lanka of such foreign State, its nationals, or of corporations, companies and other associations incorporated or constituted under its laws, such Treaty or Agreement shall have the force of law in Sri Lanka and otherwise than in the interests of national security no written law shall be enacted or made, and no executive or administrative action shall be taken, in contravention of the provisions of such Treaty or Agreement.
The provisions of Article 165 and Article 169 (12) shall mutatis mutandis, apply to, and in relation to, any person or officer who fails to take and subscribe, or make and subscribe an oath or affirmation as required by this paragraph.
Where any person is empowered under the provisions of the Constitution to delegate any power, duty or function to any other person, such person delegating such power, duty or function may, notwithstanding such delegation, exercise, perform or discharge such power, duty or function and may at any time revoke such delegation.
In this Article, "person" includes anybody of persons or any authority.
Where the Speaker is unable to discharge the functions of his office, the powers, duties and functions conferred or imposed on, or assigned to, the Speaker by any provision of the Constitution, other than by Articles 31 (4), 37, 38 (2) (b), 39 (2) and 40, may be exercised, performed or discharged by the Deputy Speaker.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other provision of the Constitution, the person holding the office of President immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall be the first President under the Constitution and shall be deemed for all purposes to have been elected as the President of the Republic, and shall, subject, to the provisions of Article 31, hold office for a period of six  years from February 4, 1978.
The President shall, notwithstanding the provisions of Article 32, be deemed to have assumed office immediately upon the commencement of the Constitution and shall be entitled thereupon to exercise, perform and discharge all the powers, duties and functions conferred or imposed on, or assigned to, the President by the Constitution or otherwise. The President shall, as soon as possible thereafter at a sitting of Parliament, take and subscribe the oath or make and subscribe the affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other provision of the Constitution-
Where a Member ceases to be a member of the recognized political party to which he belonged by reason of being expelled from such party, he shall be entitled to apply, within one month of the date of such expulsion by petition in writing, to the Supreme Court for a determination that such expulsion was invalid. In the event of any such application being made, the Registrar of the Supreme Court shall forthwith inform the Secretary-General of Parliament in writing, of such application. Every such application shall be heard and determined by not less than three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall, within two months of the making of such application, determine whether such expulsion was valid or not.
The Speaker shall, on receiving in the aforesaid manner, a communication alleging that a Member has ceased to be a member of the recognized political party to which such Member belonged, appoint a Select Committee consisting of not less than five Members of Parliament (one of whom shall be nominated as Chairman thereof) to inquire into, and report to Parliament on, the circumstances in which such Member is alleged to have resigned from, or to have been expelled from, or to have otherwise ceased to be a member of, such party, and the reasons therefor:
Provided, however, that where such communication alleges that a Member has ceased to be a member of the recognized political party to which he belonged by reason of his being expelled therefrom, no Select Committee shall be appointed as aforesaid until after the expiration of a period of' one month from the date of such alleged expulsion, and in any case where such Member has applied to the Supreme Court for a determination that such expulsion was invalid, unless and until the Supreme Court has determined that such expulsion was valid.
The provisions of the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in  relation to proceedings before, and to the privileges, Immunities and powers of, a Select Committee appointed as aforesaid, and every such Select Committee shall be deemed, for the purposes of that Act, to be duly authorized by an order of Parliament to send for persons, papers and records.
After consideration of the report made by a Select Committee appointed as aforesaid, Parliament may, by resolution passed by not less than eighty-five members voting in its favour, resolve that the Member to whom such report relates, shall cease to be a Member of Parliament. The Speaker shall endorse on every resolution so passed, a certificate in the following form:-
"This resolution has been passed by the majority required by Article 161 (d) (ii) of the Constitution".
The seat of such Member shall, with effect from the date of such certificate, become vacant.
Every such certificate shall be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be questioned in any court, and no court or tribunal shall inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the validity of the resolution on which such certificate is endorsed on any ground whatsoever.
Provided that where the Secretary of such political party fails to nominate a member of such political party to fill such vacancy under the preceding provisions of this sub-paragraph within thirty days of his being required to do so and in the aforesaid manner or where the Secretary of a political party had been required, before the coming into force of this proviso, to nominate a member of such political party to fill any such vacancy under such provisions and such Secretary fails, within thirty days of the coming into force of this proviso, to nominate a member of such political party to fill such vacancy, or where such political party is deemed to be proscribed under Article 157 (a), then, the Commissioner of Election shall forthwith so inform the President, who shall, within thirty days of the receipt by him of such information, by Notice published in the Gazette order the Commissioner of Elections to hold an election for the electoral district in respect of which such vacancy has occurred. The Commissioner of Elections shall thereupon hold an election, in accordance with Part I and Parts IV to VI (both inclusive) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, for such electoral district as existed immediately preceding the Constitution and on the basis of such part of the register, prepared under the Registration of Electors Act, No. 44 of 1980, and in operation, as corresponds to such electoral district. The aforesaid parts of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, shall, for the purposes of such election and notwithstanding the repeal of such Order in Council, be deemed to be in force and shall, mutatis mutandis, and except as otherwise expressly provided in the Constitution, apply to such election.
The law applicable to election petitions in relation to such electoral district shall be the aforesaid parts of such Order in Council as applied aforesaid and in the event of such election being declared void and no other person is determined to have been duly returned or elected, the election to fill such vacancy shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this proviso.
If the Court of Appeal makes, on such application, a declaration that such Member has directly or indirectly, in or outside Sri Lanka, supported, espoused, promoted, financed, encouraged or advocated the establishment of a separate State within the territory of Sri Lanka, the seat of such Member shall be deemed to be vacant with effect from the date of such declaration and such Member shall be disqualified from sitting and voting in Parliament and from being elected or nominated to Parliament for a period of seven years from the date of such declaration. The vacancy occurring in the membership of Parliament by reason of such declaration shall be filled in the manner provided in paragraph (iii).
The jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal' in respect of its powers under this sub-paragraph shall be exercised in the manner provided in sub-paragraph (iv) of the proviso to paragraph (2) of Article 146.
All Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts established by the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, holding office on the day immediately before the commencement of the Constitution shall, on the commencement of the Constitution, cease to hold office.
Subject to the provisions of Article 163 every person who immediately before the commencement of the Constitution –
shall continue in such service or hold such office or appointment under the same terms and conditions.
Unless Parliament otherwise provides, the Republic of Sri Lanka shall continue to possess and exercise all powers, privileges, immunities and rights whatsoever possessed, exercised or exercisable immediately prior to the commencement of the Constitution.
All rights and all duties or obligations, however arising, of the Government of Sri Lanka and subsisting immediately prior to the commencement of the Constitution shall be rights, duties and obligations of the Government of the Republic of Sri Lanka under the Constitution.
Unless Parliament otherwise provides –
Provided that any proceedings in relation to any alleged breach of privileges of Parliament pending in the Supreme Court shall stand removed to the Supreme Court created and established by the Constitution;
Provided that it shall be competent for the Court of Appeal and all officers of such Court to take all such steps as may be necessary, including the entering of decrees if not already entered and taxation and recovery of costs so as to ensure that such judgments, orders and decrees are completely and effectively complied with, as if they had been delivered or made by the Court of Appeal created and established by the Constitution;
shall, from the date on which this Article comes into force, be called and known also as President's Counsel and shall continue to enjoy all such privileges as were hitherto enjoyed by a Queen's Counsel.
In the Constitution –
“commencement of the Constitution” means the date appointed by the Proclamation made under Article 172;
“conclusion of the General Election” means the time at which Members of Parliament for all the electoral districts in respect of which a poll has been taken on the date or dates specified in the Proclamation made under Article 70(5) have been declared elected by the respective returning officers, or when on the results declared more than half the total membership of Parliament consists of Members belonging to any single recognized political party or independent group, whichever event occurs earlier;
“existing law” and “existing written law” mean any law and written law, respectively, in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution which under the Constitution continue in force;
“judicial officer”, other than in Article 111M, means any person who holds office as –
No court or tribunal or institution shall have jurisdiction to determine the question whether a person is a judicial officer within the meaning of the Constitution but such question shall be determined by the Judicial Service Commission whose decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.
No act of such person or proceeding held before such person, prior to such determination, shall be, deemed to be invalid by reason of such determination;
“law” means any Act of Parliament and any law enacted by any legislature at any time prior to the commencement of the Constitution and includes an Order in Council;
“local authority” means any Municipal Council, Urban Council, Town Council or Village Council and includes any Authority created and established by or under any law to exercise, perform and discharge powers, duties and functions corresponding to or similar to the powers, duties and functions exercised, performed and discharged by any such Council;
“public corporation” means any corporation, board or other body which was or is established by or under any written law other than the Companies Ordinance, with funds or capital wholly or partly provided by the Government by way of grant, loan or otherwise;
“public officer” means a person who holds any paid office under the Republic, other than a judicial officer, but does not include –
“recognized political party” means unless Parliament otherwise provides, every political party which is treated as a recognized political party under the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946;
“territorial waters” includes the territorial sea and the historic waters of Sri Lanka;
“written law” means any law and subordinate legislation and includes statutes made by a Provincial Council, Orders, Proclamations, Rules, By-laws and Regulations made or issued by anybody or person having power or authority under any law to make or issue the same.
Every person holding office on the day prior to the date of the commencement of this Act –
shall, continue to hold such office under the same terms and conditions.
All matters pertaining to the appointment, promotion, transfer, disciplinary control and dismissal of any police officer pending before the Public Service Commission, on or before the date of the commencement of this Act, shall stand removed to the National Police Commission established by Chapter XVIIIA of the Constitution and accordingly such matter shall be continued and completed before such National Police Commission.
[image]
[image]
"I………………………………………………………………………………………do [solemnly declare and affirm/Swear] that I will faithfully perform the duties and discharge the functions of the office of ………………………………………………… in accordance with the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and the law, and that I will be faithful to the Republic of Sri Lanka and that I will do the best of my ability uphold and defend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka.”
Clerks
Deputy Fiscals
Interpreters
Stenographers
Typists
Binders
Colombo City and Dehiwela -Mount Lavinia -(Municipal Limits) 1 Member
Colombo District (excluding Colombo City and Dehiwela-Mount Lavinia) 2 Members
Kalutara District … … … 1 Member
Kandy District … … … 2 Members
Matale District … … … 1 Member
Nuwara-Eliya District … … … 1 Member
Galle District … … … 2 Members
Matara District … … … 1 Member
Hambantota District … … … 1 Member
Jaffna District … … … 3 Members
Mannar and Vavuniya Districts … … … 1 Member
Batticaloa District … … … 1 Member
Trincomalee District … … … 1 Member
Ampara District … … … 2 Members
Kurunegala District … … … 3 Members
Puttalam District … … … 1 Member
Anuradhapura District … … … 3 Members
Polonnaruwa District … … … 1 Member
Badulla District … … … 3 Members
Moneragala District … … … 1 Member
Kegalle District … … … 2 Members
Ratnapura District … … … 2 Members
“District” means the Administrative District established under the Administrative Districts Act (Chapter 392) having the limits specified thereunder as on July 21, 1977.
"I,………………………………………………… [do solemnly declare and affirm/Swear] that I will uphold and defend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka and that I will not, directly or indirectly, in or outside Sri Lanka, support, espouse, promote, finance, encourage or advocate the establishment of a separate State within the territory of Sri Lanka.”
Western
North-Western
Uva
Sabaragamuwa
Central
Eastern
Southern
North-Central
Northern
(This would include the promotion of scientific and industrial research within the Province and the preparation, co-ordination and the implementation of industrial development plans for the Province).
Public Order and the exercise of Police powers as set out in this Appendix within the Province, but not including –
Provided that any Officer of the National Division seconded to any Provincial Division against whom disciplinary action has been taken by a Provincial Police Commission, shall have the right to appeal to the National Police Commission, whose decision on such appeal shall be final.
These principles shall be uniformly applied to all Provincial Divisions.
Provided also that a recruit may, on appointment, set out his preferences as to the Division in which he wishes to serve and that he shall, if possible, be posted to the Division of his choice, with the consent of the Division concerned.
The National Police Commission may, where he considers it necessary provide for alternate training for members of any Provincial Division.
Provided that every such order shall cease to be in force as soon as the President is satisfied that Public order has been restored or on the expiry of thirty days from the date of the order, whichever is earlier.
The National Division of the Sri Lanka Police Force shall be responsible for the prevention, detection and investigation of all offences specified in the Schedule and subject to the powers of the Attorney-General in terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, for the institution of prosecutions in the relevant Courts in respect of such offences.
Every recruit to the Sri Lanka Police Force shall have proficiency in his mother tongue. For the first promotion he shall acquire proficiency in a language other than his mother tongue. For the next promotion he shall acquire a knowledge of the third language. The three languages recognized for this purpose are Sinhala, Tamil and English.
State land shall continue to vest in the Republic and may be disposed of in accordance with Article 33(d) and written law governing this matter.
Subject as aforesaid, land shall be Provincial Council Subject, subject to the following special provisions:–
(In order to ensure standards the Ministry of Education will retain the right to inspect and supervise the management of schools).
National Policy on all Subjects and Functions
Defence and National Security: Internal Security; Law and order and prevention and detection of crime except do the extent specified in item 1 of List I.
This would include –
Foreign Affairs
This would include –
Posts and Telecommunications; Broadcasting; Television
This would include –
Justice in so far as it relates to the judiciary and the courts structure.
This would include –
Finance in relation to national revenue, monetary policy and external resources; customs.
This would include –
Foreign Trade; Inter-Province Trade and Commerce
This would include –
Ports and Harbours
This would include –
Aviation and Airports
This would include –
Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and training provided by Provinces and other agencies.
National Transport
This would include –
Rivers and Waterways; Shipping and Navigation; Maritime zones including Historical Waters, Territorial Waters, exclusive Economic zone and Continental Shelf and Internal Waters; State Lands and Foreshore, except to the extent specified in Item 18 of List I.
This would include –
Minerals and Mines
This would include –
Immigration and Emigration and Citizenship
This would include –
Elections Including Presidential, Parliamentary, Provincial Councils and Local Authorities
This would include –
Elections to Parliament, Provincial Councils, Local Authorities and to the Office of President; the Department of Elections.
Census and Statistics
This would include –
Professional Occupations and Training
This would include –
National Archives; Archaeological Activities and Sites and Antiquities declared by or under any law made by Parliament to be of National Importance.
This would include –
Ancient and historical monuments and records and archaeological sites and remains declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance.
All Subjects and Functions not Specified in List I or List III including –
Education and Educational Services. - Education, except to the extent specified in items 3 and 4 of List I.
