WHEREAS the People of Saint Christopher and Nevis
NOW THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Saint Christopher and Nevis:
This Constitution is the supreme law of Saint Christopher and Nevis and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
Whereas every person in Saint Christopher and Nevis is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, birth, political opinions, colors, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely-
the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of those rights and freedoms by any person does not impair the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
Provided that a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace or an officer of a court of a police officer acting in pursuance of the order of a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace shall not be under any personal liability to pay compensation under this subsection in consequence of any act performed by him in good faith in the discharge of the functions of his office and any liability to pay any such compensation in consequence of any such act shall be a liability of the Crown.
A person shall not be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other like treatment.
Provided that, if the legislature so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph (a), the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the interest in or right over the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence:
Provided that the trial may take place in his absence in any case in which it is so provided by a law under which he is entitled to adequate notice of the charge and the date, time and place of the trial and to a reasonable opportunity of appearing before the court.
and except so far as that provisions or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provisions or, as the case may be, the things done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Nothing contained in or done under the authority of a law enacted by Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of section 5 or 15 to the extent that the law authorizes the taking during any period of public emergency of measures that are reasonably justifiable for dealing with the situation that exists in Saint Christopher and Nevis or in part of Saint Christopher and Nevis during that period.
and may make such declarations and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of section 3 to 17 (inclusive):
Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleger are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
unless it has in the meantime been approved by resolution of the Assembly.
unless it has in the meantime been approved by resolution of the Assembly.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not exceeding twelve months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension, and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a further resolution.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Saint Christopher and Nevis other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and in sections 4 and 6 a court established by a disciplinary law;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplinary force" means-
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline or that force, is subject to that discipline.
There shall be for Saint Christopher and Nevis a Governor-General who shall be a citizen appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's representative in Saint Christopher and Nevis.
he may appoint any person in Saint Christopher and Nevis to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as he may specify.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into by any court of law.
A person appointed to hold or act in the office of Governor-General or to be his deputy shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of office.
There shall be for Saint Christopher and Nevis a Parliament which shall consist of Her Majesty and a National Assembly.
Provided that at any time when a person who is a Senator holds the office of Attorney-General the number of Senators shall be increased by one.
Subject to section 28, a person shall be qualified to be elected or appointed as a member of the National Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he is a citizen of the age of twenty-one years or upwards and he or one of his parents was born in Saint Christopher and Nevis and he is domiciled there at the date of his nomination for election or his appointment, as the case may be.
"member" means member of the National Assembly;
"minister or religion" means any person in holy orders and any other person the principal function of whose occupation include teaching or preaching in any congregation for religious worship.
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the National Assembly.
Provided that the Speaker shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a member of the Assembly on a dissolution of Parliament, until the Assembly first meets after the dissolution; or
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
and, if it is made by a person other than the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General may intervene and may then appear and be represented in the proceedings.
those provisions shall accordingly have effect in the island of Nevis; and if there is any inconsistency between those provisions and the provisions of any law enacted by the Nevis Island Legislature, the provisions of the law enacted by Parliament shall prevail.
There shall preside at any sitting of the National Assembly-
Provided that question of no confidence in the Government shall be determined by a majority of the votes of all the Representatives.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of any such bill as is referred to in section 38(2) he shall, if he is a Representative, have an original vote but no casting vote.
Except on the recommendation of the Governor-General signified by a Minister, the National Assembly shall not
Without prejudice to any provision made by Parliament relating to the powers, privileges and immunities of the National Assembly and its committees, or the privileges and immunities of the members and officers of the Assembly and of other persons concerned in the business of the Assembly or its committees, no civil or criminal proceedings may be or written in a report to, the Assembly or a committee thereof or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him therein by petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise.
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
Provided that if the office of the Prime Minister is vacant and the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that there is no prospect of his being able within a reasonable time to appoint to that office a person who can command the support of the majority of the Representatives, the Governor-General shall dissolve Parliament.
to fill the vacancy within ninety days of the occurrence of the vacancy unless Parliament is sooner dissolved.
provided that the chairman shall not be a member of the Assembly or of the Nevis Island Assembly.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may, by directions in writing, assign to the Prime Minister, or any other Minister responsibility for any business of the Government, including the administration of any department of the Government.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers without that advice and in his own deliberate judgment.
Provided that the foregoing provisions shall not apply where the Governor-General is authorized to act in his own deliberate judgment in accordance with the following provisions-
Provided that before that Governor-General acts in accordance with a recommendation in any case he may, acting in his own deliberate judgment, once request the person or authority by whom it is made to reconsider the recommendation and if, upon any reconsideration of a recommendation, the person or authority makes a different recommendation, the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, may likewise once request the person or authority by whom it is made to reconsider that different recommendation.
The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the Government and shall furnish the Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter for which the Government is responsible.
Provided that no Representative shall be eligible for appointment unless it appears to the Governor-General that Representative commands the support of at least one other Representative.
Provided that, if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Representative or a Senator immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary.
A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance, the oath of office and the oath of secrecy.
Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of the Government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department; and, subject to such direction and control every department of the Government shall be under the supervision of a permanent secretary whose office shall be a public office;
Provided that two or more departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any other law, the Governor-General may constitute offices for Saint Christopher and Nevis, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the power conferred of the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2)(c) shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.
Provided that his seat shall become vacant-
All revenue or other moneys raised or received by the Government (not being revenues or other moneys that are payable, by or under any law, into some other fund of the Government established for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form a Consolidated Fund.
There shall be such provisions as may be made by Parliament under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister for the time being responsible for finance may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the Purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the law, whichever is the earlier.
the Minister may, by special warrant, authorize the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the money required to meet that expenditure:
Provided that the total such for the time being authorized to be issued under this subsection, for which no provisions has been made by an appropriation law, shall not exceed such amount as may be prescribed by Parliament.
Provided that, for the purposes of discharging its functions in relation to public offices on the staff of the Nevis Island Administration, the Commission shall consist of
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that-
Provided that before the Public Service Commission makes any recommendation under this subsection it shall consult the Prime Minister and the Judicial and Legal Services Commission:
Provided that before the Judicial and Legal Services Commission makes any recommendation under this subsection it shall consult the Public Service Commission.
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which is alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Audit, shall not be have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that before making any recommendation as to the exercise of the powers conferred by this section in any case the Public Service Commission shall consult the Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
Provided that before making any recommendation as to the exercise of the powers conferred by this subsection in any case the Judicial and Legal Services Commission shall consult the Public Service Commission.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that before the Commission makes any recommendation to the Governor-General with respect to the appointment of any person to hold the office of Chief of Police or deputy Chief of Police the Commission shall consult with the Prime Minister and if the Prime Minister signifies his objection to the appointment of any person to the office the Commission shall not recommend the Governor-General to appoint that person.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favorable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
The following persons shall become citizens on 19th September 1983-
The following persons born on or after 19th September 1983 shall become citizens at the date of their birth-
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen by virtue of this paragraph if at the time of his birth-
provided that if it is so provided by Parliament an application for registration as a citizen under this subsection may, in such circumstances as may be prescribed by Parliament in the interests of defence, public safety or public order, be refused by the Minister responsible for the matter in any case in which he is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for refusing the application.
Provided that, if any such person is or has been married, he may make the application himself.
There shall be such provision as may be made by Parliament-
Provided that any law enacted for the purposes of paragraph (d) shall include provisions under which the person concerned shall have a right of appeal to a court of law of competent jurisdiction or other independent authority and shall be permitted to appear before the court or authority in person or, at his own expense, to be represented by a legal practitioner of his own choice.
Subject to section 36, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases-
There shall be a legislature for the island of Nevis, which shall be styled the Nevis Island Legislature and shall consist of Her Majesty and an assembly styled the Nevis Island Assembly.
"There shall be not less than five electoral districts in the island of Nevis".
and subject to subsection (2), that officer shall comply with those general directions.
The High Court shall, to the exclusion of any other court of law have original jurisdiction in any dispute between the Administration and the Government if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which the existence or extent of a legal right depends.
"the Assembly" means the Nevis Island Assembly.
If, by virtue of a law enacted by the Nevis Island Legislature under section 113(1), the island of Nevis ceases to be federated with the island of Saint Christopher, the provisions of schedule 3 shall forthwith have effect.
whichever is the later:
Provided that the resignation may be withdrawn before it takes effect if the person or authority to whom the resignation is addressed consents to its withdrawal.
"citizen" means a citizen of Saint Christopher and Nevis and "citizenship" shall be construed accordingly;
"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as Parliament may prescribe;
"defence force" means a naval, military or air force;
"dollars" means dollars in the currency of Saint Christopher and Nevis;
"financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date as may be prescribed by any law enacted by Parliament;
"the Gazette" means the official Gazette of Saint Christopher and Nevis;
"the Government" means Her Majesty's Government of Saint Christopher and Nevis;
"grandparent", in relation to any other person, means a parent of one of his parents;
"law" means any law in force in Saint Christopher and Nevis or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rules of law and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Leader of the Opposition" means the Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly;
"legal practitioner" means a person entitled to be in or to enter Saint Christopher and Nevis and entitled to practice as a barrister in Saint Christopher and Nevis or, except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, so entitled to practice as a solicitor;
"the legislature" means Parliament; Provided that in relation to any specified matter it includes the Nevis Island Legislature;
"Minister" means a Minister of the Government;
"parent", in relation to any other person, includes:
but, in the case of a person who has been adopted, it does not include any person who has relinquished his parental rights over him as a consequence of the adoption.
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Saint Christopher and Nevis;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"oath of allegiance" means, the oath of secrecy set out in schedule 4;
"oath of office" means, in relation to any office, the oath for the due execution of that office set out in schedule 4;
"oath of secrecy" means the oath of secrecy set out in schedule 4;
"the Police Force" means the Royal Saint Christopher and Nevis Police Force and includes any other police force established to succeed to the functions of that Force;
"proclamation" means a proclamation published in the Gazette or, if such publications not reasonably practicable, published in Saint Christopher and Nevis by such means as are reasonably practicable and effective;
"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service in a civil capacity of the Crown in right of the Government,
"session" means:
"sitting" means:
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" means the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly;
"specified matter" means, in relation to the government of the island of Nevis, a matter specified in schedule 5 to this Constitution.
Provided that-
Sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 18 and 19.
"1. The State and its territory
"(1) The island of Saint Christopher (which is otherwise known as Saint Kitts) shall be a sovereign democratic state which may be styled Saint Christopher or Saint Kitts.
"(2) The territory of Saint Christopher shall comprise all areas that were comprised in the associated state of Saint Christopher and Nevis immediately before 19th September 1983 except the island of Nevis, together with such other areas as may be declared by Parliament to form part of the territory of Saint Christopher."
I, _______________________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will faithfully bear true allegiance to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second, Her Heirs and Successors, according to law.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
I, _______________________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will honor, uphold and preserve the Constitution of Saint Christopher and Nevis, and the law, that I will consciously, impartially, and to the best of my ability discharge my duties as _______________________ and do right to all manner of people without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
I, _______________________, do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will not on any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose any council, advise, opinion or vote given by any Minister as a member of the Cabinet and that I will not, except with the authority of the Cabinet and to such extent as may be required for the proper conduct of the Government of Saint Christopher and Nevis, directly or indirectly reveal the business or proceedings of the Cabinet or any matter coming to my knowledge as a member (or Secretary to) the Cabinet.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation).
Subject to section 28, a person shall be qualified to be elected or appointed as a member of the Assembly if, and shall not be so qualified unless, he is a citizen of the age of twenty-one years or upwards and he or one of his parents was born in Saint Christopher and Nevis and he is domiciled there at the date of his nomination for election or his appointment, as the case may be.
"member" means a member of the Assembly;
"minister of a religion" means any person in holy orders and any other person the principal functions of whose occupation include teaching or preaching in any congregation for religious worship.
Provided that the president of the Assembly may, at the request of the member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Assembly.
Provided that he shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a member of the Assembly on a dissolution of the Legislature until the Assembly first meets after dissolution; or
and, if it is made by a person other than the Attorney-General, the Attorney-General may intervene and may then appear to be represented in the proceedings.
There shall preside at any sitting of the Assembly-
Provided that questions of no confidence in the Administration shall be determined by a majority of the votes of all the elected members of the Assembly.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of any such bill as is referred to in section 113(2) he shall, if he is an elected member of the Assembly, have an original vote but no casting vote.
Except on the recommendation of the Governor-General signified by the Premier, the Assembly shall not
Without prejudice to any provision made by Parliament relating to the powers, privileges and immunities of the Assembly and its committees, or the privileges and immunities of the members and officers of the Assembly and of other persons concerned in the business of the Assembly or its committees, no civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against any member of the Assembly for words spoken before, or written in a report to, the Assembly or a committee thereof or by reason of any matter.
Provided that the life of the Legislature shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
Provided that if the office of the Premier is vacant and the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that there is no prospect of his being able within a reasonable time to appoint to that office a person who can command the support of the majority of the elected members of the Assembly, the Governor-General shall dissolve the Legislature.
Provided that the chairman shall not be a member of the Assembly or of the National Assembly.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that no elected member shall be eligible for appointment unless it appears to the Governor-General that the elected member commands the support of at least one other elected member.
The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Premier, may, by directions in writing, assign to the Premier or any other member of the Administration, responsibility for any business of the Administration, including the administration of any department of the Administration.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgement, considers that is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Premier owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers without that advice and in his own deliberate judgement.
The Premier shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the Administration and shall furnish the Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter for which the Administration is responsible.
A member of the Administration shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance, the oath of office and the oath of secrecy.
Where any member of the Administration has been charged with responsibility for any department of the Administration, he shall exercise general direction and control over the department; and, subject to such direction and control, every department of the Administration shall be under the supervision of a permanent secretary whose office shall be a public office:
Provided that two or more departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the Assembly and, when the supplementary estimate has been approved by the Assembly, a supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced in the Assembly providing for the issue of such sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the purposes specified therein.
There shall be such provision as may be made by the Legislature under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the member of the Administration for the time being responsible for finance may authorize the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Administration until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the law, whichever is the earlier.
the members may, by special warrant, authorise the issue from the Consolidated Fund of the moneys required to meet the expenditure:
Provided that the total sum for the time being authorised to be issued under this subsection, for which no provisions has been made by an appropriation law, shall not exceed such amounts as may be prescribed by the Legislature.
In this schedule, unless the context otherwise requires
"the Assembly" means the Nevis Island Assembly;
"the Consolidated Fund" means the Nevis Island Consolidated Fund;
"Leader of the Opposition" means the Leader of the Opposition in the Assembly;
"the Legislature" means the Nevis Island Legislature;
