WHEREAS the People of Saint Lucia-
NOW, THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Saint Lucia:
the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any person does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought before a court without undue delay and in any case not later than seventy-two hours after such arrest or detention.
Provided that a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace or an officer of a court or a police officer shall not be under any personal liability to pay compensation under this subsection in consequence of any act performed by him in good faith in the discharge of the functions of his office and any liability to pay any such compensation in consequence of any such act shall be a liability of the Crown.
Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph (a) or (c) of this subsection the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the interest in or right over the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
"acquisition", in relation to an interest in or right over property, means transferring that interest or right to another person or extinguishing or curtailing that interest or right.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence:
Provided that the trial may take place in his absence in any case in which it is so provided by a law under which he is entitled to adequate notice of the charge and the date, time and place of the trial and to a reasonable opportunity of appearing before the court.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and may make such declarations and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 2 to 15 (inclusive) of this Constitution:
Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
unless it has in the meantime been approved by resolutions of the Senate and the House.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not exceeding twelve months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a further resolution.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Saint Lucia other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and in sections 2 and 4 of this Constitution a court established by a disciplinary law;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means-
"legal practitioner" means a person entitled to be in or to enter Saint Lucia and entitled to practise as a barrister in Saint Lucia or, except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, entitled to practise as a solicitor in Saint Lucia;
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Saint Lucia to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be specified in the instrument by which he is appointed.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into by any court of law.
"minister of religion" means any person in holy orders and any other person the functions of whose principal occupation include teaching or preaching in any congregation for religious worship.
Provided that the President may, at the request of the Senator, from time to time, extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the Senator to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the Senate.
Provided that the President shall not vacate his office by reason only that he has ceased to be a Senator on a dissolution of Parliament until the Senate first meets after that dissolution;
"minister of religion" means any person in holy orders and any other person the functions of whose principal occupation include teaching or preaching in any congregation for religious worship.
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
Provided that a person who is not a member of the House shall not be elected as Speaker if-
Provided that the offices of Clerk of the Senate and Clerk of the House may be held by the same person.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of such a bill as is referred to in subsection (2) or (3) of section 41 of this Constitution or the question of a motion for such a resolution as is referred to in subsection (4) or (5) of that section a Speaker who was so elected or other member presiding in the House shall have an original vote but no casting vote.
Provided that-
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
Provided that-
to fill the vacancy within three months of the occurrence of the vacancy unless Parliament is sooner dissolved.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that a report under paragraph (b) of that subsection shall not be submitted until the expiration of six years from the submission of the last report under that subsection.
Provided that responsibility for finance shall be assigned to a Minister who is a member of the House.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers without that advice and in his own deliberate judgment.
Provided that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply where the Governor-General is authorised to act in his own deliberate judgment in accordance with the following provisions of this Constitution-
Provided that, if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Senator or a member of the House immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary.
Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2)(c) of this section shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.
Provided that his seat shall become vacant-
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House and, when the supplementary estimate has been approved by the House, a supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced in the House providing for the issue of such sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the purposes specified therein.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that-
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Officer, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any law enacted by parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Audit, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that before the Commission tenders advice to the Governor-General with respect to the appointment of any person to hold the office of Commissioner the Commission shall consult with the Prime Minister and if the Prime Minister signifies his objection to the appointment of any person to the office the Commission shall not advise the Governor-General to appoint that person.
Provided that in the case of any such decision as is referred to in subsection (1)(c) of this section, an appeal shall lie in the first instance to the Commissioner of Police if it is so provided by Parliament or, if it is not so provided, if the Commissioner so requires.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
shall become a citizen at such commencement.
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth-
but whose marriage has been terminated by death or dissolution before such commencement.
Provided that if it is so provided by Parliament an application for registration as a citizen under this subsection may, in such circumstances as may be prescribed by Parliament in the interests of defence, public safety or public order, be refused by the Minister responsible for the matter in any case in which he is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for refusing the application.
Provided that, if any such person is or has been married, he may make the application himself.
"British protected person" means a person who is a British protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1948;
"the British Nationality Act 1948" includes any Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom altering that Act.
Provided that he shall vacate his office-
Provided that the House may by resolution extend that period for further periods not exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall consult the Leader of the Opposition before tendering any advice to the Governor-General for the purposes of this subsection.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
whichever is the later:
Provided that the resignation may be withdrawn before it takes effect if the person or authority to whom the resignation is addressed consents to its withdrawal.
"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as Parliament may prescribe;
"dollars" means dollars in the currency of Saint Lucia;
"financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date as may be prescribed by law;
"the Government" means the Government of Saint Lucia;
"the House" means the House of Assembly;
"law" means any law in force in Saint Lucia or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law and "lawful" and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Minister" means a Minister of the Government and includes a temporary Minister;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Saint Lucia;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by law;
"oath of office" means, in relation to any office, such oath for the due execution of that office as may be prescribed by law;
"oath of secrecy" means such oath of secrecy as may be prescribed by law;
"the Police Force" means the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force and includes any other police force established to succeed to the functions of the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force;
"President" and "Deputy President" mean the respective persons holding office as President and Deputy President of the Senate;
"public office" means any office of emolument in the public service;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service in a civil capacity of the Government;
"session" means, in relation to the Senate or the House, the period beginning when it first meets after Parliament has at any time been prorogued or dissolved and ending when Parliament is prorogued or when Parliament is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means, in relation to the Senate or the House, the period during which it is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee;
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" means the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House.
Provided that-
Sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 18 and 19.
All constituencies shall contain as nearly equal numbers of inhabitants as appears to the Constituency Boundaries Commission to be reasonably practicable but the Commission may depart from this principle to such extent as it considers expedient to take account of the following factors, that is to say:-
