WHEREAS the Peoples of the Islands of Saint Vincent, who are known as Vincentians--
AND WHEREAS Saint Vincent (which comprises the inhabited islands of Saint Vincent, Bequia, Union Island, Canouan, Mustique, Mayreau, Petite Saint Vincent, Prune Islands  and all other inhabited or uninhabited islands, islets, cays or lands lying between latitudes 12째 31' 50.N and 13째 23' 30.N and longitudes 61째 07' 30.W and 61째 28' 00.W) is henceforth to be styled Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
NOW, THEREFORE, the following provisions shall have effect as the Constitution of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:--
Whereas every person in Saint Vincent is entitled to the fundamental rights and freedoms, that is to say, the right, whatever his race, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed or sex, but subject to respect for the rights and freedoms of others and for the public interest, to each and all of the following, namely--
the provisions of this Chapter shall have effect for the purpose of affording protection to those rights and freedoms subject to such limitations of that protection as are contained in those provisions, being limitations designed to ensure that the enjoyment of the said rights and freedoms by any person does not prejudice the rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.
or if he dies as the result of a lawful act of war.
and who is not released, shall be brought without undue delay before a court.
Provided that a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace or an officer of a court or a police officer acting in pursuance of the order of a judge, a magistrate or a justice of the peace shall not be under any personal liability to pay compensation under this subsection in consequence of any act performed by him in good faith in the discharge of the functions of his office and any liability to pay any such compensation in consequence of any such act shall be a liability of the Crown.
No person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other treatment.
Provided that if Parliament so provides in relation to any matter referred to in paragraph(a) or (c) of this subsection the right of access shall be by way of appeal (exercisable as of right at the instance of the person having the interest in or right over the property) from a tribunal or authority, other than the High Court, having jurisdiction under any law to determine that matter.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society; or
"acquisition", in relation to an interest in or right over property, means transferring that interest or right to another person or extinguishing or curtailing that interest or right.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, anything done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except with his own consent the trial shall not take place in his absence unless he so conducts himself as to render the continuance of the proceedings in his presence impracticable and the court has ordered him to be removed and the trial to proceed in his absence:
Provided that the trial may take place in his absence in any case in which it is so provided by a law under which he is entitled to adequate notice of the charge and the date, time and place of the trial and to a reasonable opportunity of appearing before the court.
Provided that nothing in this subsection shall prevent the prosecution or the court from commenting on his failure to give evidence on his own behalf or prevent the court from drawing inferences from any such failure.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
and except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority thereof is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
Nothing contained in or done under the authority of a law enacted by Parliament shall be held to be inconsistent with or in contravention of section 3 or section 13 of this Constitution to the extent that the law authorises the taking during any period of public emergency of measures that are reasonably justifiable for dealing with the situation that exists in Saint Vincent during that period.
and may make such declarations and orders, issue such writs and give such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of sections 2 to 15 (inclusive) of this Constitution:
Provided that the High Court may decline to exercise its powers under this subsection if it is satisfied that adequate means of redress for the contravention alleged are or have been available to the person concerned under any other law.
Provided that any such resolution may be extended from time to time by a further such resolution, each extension not exceeding twelve months from the date of the resolution effecting the extension; and any such resolution may be revoked at any time by a further resolution.
"court" means any court of law having jurisdiction in Saint Vincent other than a court established by a disciplinary law, and includes Her Majesty in Council and in sections 2 and 4 of this Constitution a court established by a disciplinary law;
"disciplinary law" means a law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
"disciplined force" means--
"legal practitioner" means a person entitled to be in or to enter Saint Vincent and entitled to practise as a barrister in Saint Vincent or, except in relation to proceedings before a court in which a solicitor has no right of audience, entitled to practise as a solicitor in Saint Vincent;
"member", in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline.
There shall be a Governor-General of Saint Vincent who shall be appointed by Her Majesty and shall hold office during Her Majesty's pleasure and who shall be Her Majesty's representative in Saint Vincent.
A person appointed to hold the office of Governor-General shall, before entering upon the duties of that office, take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of office.
he may, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, appoint any person in Saint Vincent to be his deputy during such absence or illness and in that capacity to perform on his behalf such of the functions of the office of Governor-General as may be  specified in the instrument by which he is appointed.
Provided that the question whether or not a deputy has conformed to and observed any such instructions shall not be enquired into in any court of law.
There shall be a Parliament of Saint Vincent which shall consist of Her Majesty and a House of Assembly.
Provided that a minister of religion may be appointed as a Senator.
"minister of religion" means any person in holy orders and any other person, the functions of whose principal occupation include teaching or preaching in any congregation for religious worship.
Of the Senators--
Provided that the Speaker may, at the request of the member, from time to time extend that period for further periods of thirty days to enable the member to pursue an appeal against the decision, so, however, that extensions of time exceeding in the aggregate one hundred and fifty days shall not be given without the approval, signified by resolution, of the House.
Provided that a person who is not a member of the House shall not be elected as Speaker if--
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the peace, order and good government of Saint Vincent.
There shall preside at any sitting of the House--
Provided that the Speaker shall not preside when a motion for his removal from office is before the House.
Provided that questions of no confidence in the Government shall be determined by a majority of the votes of all the Representatives.
Provided that in the case of the question of the final reading of such a bill as is referred to in section 38(2) of this Constitution he shall, if he is a Representative, have an original vote but no casting vote.
Except on the recommendation of the Governor-General signified by a Minister, the House shall not--
Without prejudice to any provision made by Parliament relating to the powers, privileges and immunities of the House and its committees, or the privileges and immunities of the members and officers of the House and of other persons concerned in the business of the House or its committees, no civil or criminal proceedings may be instituted against any member of the House for words spoken before, or written in a report to, the House or a committee thereof or by reason of any matter or thing brought by him therein by petition, bill, resolution, motion or otherwise.
Provided that if the House does not, within twenty-one days of the notice, meet and dispose of the motion the Clerk of the House shall summon a special meeting of the House at such time and place as he may specify for the purpose of debating and disposing of the motion.
Provided that the life of Parliament shall not be extended under this subsection for more than five years.
Provided that--
to fill the vacancy within ninety days of the occurrence of the vacancy unless Parliament is sooner dissolved.
Provided that not more than two Ministers shall be appointed from among the Senators.
Provided that not more than two persons who were Senators may be Ministers.
The Governor-General, acting in accordance with the advice of the Prime Minister, may by directions in writing, assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister responsibility for any business of the Government, including the administration of any department of government.
Provided that if the Governor-General, acting in his own deliberate judgment, considers that it is impracticable to obtain the advice of the Prime Minister owing to his absence or illness he may exercise those powers without that advice and in his own deliberate judgment.
Provided that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply where the Governor-General is authorised to act in his own deliberate judgment in accordance with the following provisions of this Constitution--
The Prime Minister shall keep the Governor-General fully informed concerning the general conduct of the government of Saint Vincent and shall furnish the Governor-General with such information as he may request with respect to any particular matter relating to the government of Saint Vincent.
Provided that, if occasion arises for making an appointment while Parliament is dissolved, a person who was a Representative or a Senator immediately before the dissolution may be appointed as a Parliamentary Secretary.
A Minister or a Parliamentary Secretary shall not enter upon the duties of his office unless he has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance, the oath of office and the oath of secrecy.
Provided that--
Where any Minister has been charged with responsibility for any department of government, he shall exercise general direction and control over that department; and, subject to such direction and control, every department of government shall be under the supervision of a public officer whose office is referred to in this Constitution as the office of a permanent secretary:
Provided that two or more government departments may be placed under the supervision of one permanent secretary.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any other law, the Governor-General may constitute offices for Saint Vincent, make appointments to any such office and terminate any such appointment.
Provided that where any other person or authority has instituted criminal proceedings, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the withdrawal of those proceedings by or at the instance of that person or authority and with the leave of the court.
Provided that the power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions by subsection (2)(c) of this section shall not be exercised in relation to any appeal by a person convicted  in any criminal proceedings or to any case stated or question of law reserved at the instance of such a person.
Provided that his seat shall become vacant--
All revenues or other moneys raised or received by Saint Vincent (not being revenues or other moneys that are payable, by or under any law for the time being in force in Saint Vincent, into some other fund established for a specific purpose) shall be paid into and form a Consolidated Fund.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House and, when the supplementary estimate has been approved by the House, a supplementary appropriation bill shall be introduced in the House providing for the issue of such sums from the Consolidated Fund and appropriating them to the purposes specified therein.
There shall be such provision as may be made by Parliament under which, if the appropriation law in respect of any financial year has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the Minister for the time being responsible for finance may authorise the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the law, whichever is the earlier.
The House shall, at the commencement of each session, appoint a Public Accounts Committee from among its members, whose duties shall be to consider the accounts referred to in section 75(2) of this Constitution in conjunction with the report of the Director of Audit and in particular to report to the House--
and such other duties relating to public accounts as the House may from time to time direct.
Provided that the Prime Minister shall--
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that--
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Public Prosecutions, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any law enacted by Parliament, to the extent to which it alters the prescribed age after a person has been appointed to be or to act as Director of Audit, shall not have effect in relation to that person unless he consents that it should have effect.
Provided that any decision of the Commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of all its members.
Provided that before the Commission tenders advice to the Governor-General with respect to the appointment of any person to hold the office of Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner the Commission shall consult with the Prime Minister and if the Prime Minister signifies his objection to the appointment of any person to the office the Commission shall not advise the Governor-General to appoint that person.
Provided that in the case of any such decision as is referred to in subsection (1)(e) of this section, an appeal shall lie in the first instance to the Police Service Commission if it is so provided by Parliament, in which case the Commission shall have the like powers as are conferred on the Board by subsection (3) of this section.
or any law in force at a later date that is not less favourable to that person.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the Public Service Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold them, reduce them in amount or suspend them.
shall become a citizen at such commencement.
Every person born in Saint Vincent after the commencement of this Constitution shall become a citizen at the date of his birth:
Provided that a person shall not become a citizen by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth--
A person born outside Saint Vincent after the commencement of this Constitution shall become a citizen at the date of his birth if, at that date, his father or mother is a citizen otherwise than by virtue of this section or section 90(3) of this Constitution.
but whose marriage has been terminated by death or dissolution before such commencement.
Provided that if it is so provided by Parliament an application for registration as a citizen under this subsection may, in such circumstances as may be prescribed by Parliament in the interests of defence, public safety or public order, be refused by the Minister responsible for the matter in any case in which he is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for refusing the application.
Provided that, if any such person is or has been married, he may make the application himself.
There shall be such provision as may be made by Parliament for--
"British protected person" means a person who is a British protected person for the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1948;
"the British Nationality Act 1948" includes any Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom altering that Act;
"father", in relation to a child born out of wedlock and not legitimated, includes a person who acknowledges and can show that he is the father of the child.
Subject to the provisions of section 36 of this Constitution, an appeal shall lie from decisions of the High Court to the Court of Appeal as of right in the following cases--
In this Chapter references to the contravention of any provision of, or the interpretation of, this Constitution shall be construed as including references to the contravention of any provision of, or the interpretation of, the Supreme Court Order.
This Constitution is the supreme law of Saint Vincent and, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if any other law is inconsistent with this Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and the other law shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.
whichever is the later:
Provided that the resignation may be withdrawn before it takes effect if the person or authority to whom the resignation is addressed consents to its withdrawal.
"Commonwealth citizen" has such meaning as Parliament may prescribe;
"dollars" means dollars in the currency of Saint Vincent;
"financial year" means any period of twelve months beginning on 1st January in any year or such other date as may be prescribed by law;
"the Government" means the Government of Saint Vincent;
"the House" means the House of Assembly;
"law" means any law in force in Saint Vincent or any part thereof, including any instrument having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law and "lawful"and "lawfully" shall be construed accordingly;
"Minister" means a Minister of the Government;
"Parliament" means the Parliament of Saint Vincent;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"oath of allegiance" means such oath of allegiance as may be prescribed by law;
"oath of office" means, in relation to any office, such oath for the due execution of that office as may be prescribed by law;
"oath of secrecy" means such oath of secrecy as may be prescribed by law;
"the Police Force" means the Royal Saint Vincent Police Force and includes any other police force established to succeed to the functions of the Royal Saint Vincent Police Force;
"public office" means any office of emoluments in the public service;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in any public office;
"the public service" means, subject to the provisions of this section, the service in a civil capacity of the Government;
"Saint Vincent" means Saint Vincent and the Grenadines;
"session" means, in relation to the House, the period beginning when it first meets after Parliament has at any time been prorogued or dissolved and ending when Parliament is prorogued or when Parliament is dissolved without having been prorogued;
"sitting" means, in relation to the House, the period during which it is sitting continuously without adjournment and includes any period during which it is in committee;
"Speaker" and "Deputy Speaker" mean the respective persons holding office as Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House.
Provided that--
Sections 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 18 and 19.
