Drawing inspiration from the Sudanese people’s struggles over the course of history and during the years of the former dictatorial regime from the time that it undermined the constitutional regime on 30 June 1989; believing in the principles of the glorious September 2018 Revolution; honoring the lives of the martyrs and affirming the rights of the victims of the policies of the former regime; affirming the role of women and their active participation in carrying out the revolution; recognizing the role of young people in leading the revolutionary movement; responding to the aspirations of the Sudanese people to build a modern, democratic nation-state in accordance with an integrated reform project; enshrining the principle of political pluralism and the establishment of a state of law that recognizes diversity, that takes citizenship as a basis for rights and duties, and that elevates the values of justice, equality and human rights;
Believing in the unity of Sudanese territory and national sovereignty; committed to the goals of the Declaration of Freedom and Change agreed upon between the Military Council and the Forces of Freedom and Change; striving to implement measures to achieve transitional justice, fight corruption, recover stolen funds, reform the national economy, achieve a state of prosperity, welfare and social justice, reform institutions of the state and public service, strengthen the pillars of social peace, deepen the values of tolerance and reconciliation between the components of the Sudanese people and rebuild trust between all the people of Sudan;
Confirming our determination to lay the foundations for a healthy civil regime to govern Sudan in the future; and based on the revolution’s legitimacy; we, the Transitional Military Council and the Forces of Freedom and Change, have agreed to issue the following Constitutional Charter:
This document is entitled the Constitutional Charter for the Transitional Period of 2019. It enters into force from its date of signature.
The Constitutional Charter is the supreme law of the Republic of Sudan. Its provisions prevail over all laws. Provisions of any law that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitutional Charter shall be repealed or amended to the extent required to remove such inconsistency.
Sovereignty is vested in the people and is exercised by the state in accordance with the provisions of this Constitutional Charter.
During the transitional period, state agencies shall be committed to performing the following duties:
The transitional government bodies are formed as follows:
The chairman and members of the Sovereignty Council shall meet the following conditions:
The Cabinet has the following competencies and powers:
The chairman and members of the Sovereignty Council and of the Cabinet, governors or ministers of provinces or states, cannot run in the general elections that follows the transitional period.
The chairman and members of the Sovereignty Council and ministers swear the following oath before the Chief Justice:
“I …………… swear by Almighty God, as chairman/member of the Transitional Sovereignty Council/Cabinet, that I will be sincere and faithful in my loyalty to the Republic of Sudan, and that I will perform my duties and responsibilities with seriousness, trustworthiness and transparency for the advancement, prosperity and progress of the Sudanese people. I swear that I am committed to and will protect and preserve the Transitional Constitutional Charter, that I will observe the laws of the Republic of Sudan, and that I will defend the sovereignty of the country. I swear that I will work for its unity, that I will strengthen the pillars of democratic governance, and that I will protect the dignity and honor of the people of Sudan. With God as my witness.”
Members in the Transitional Legislative Council shall meet the following conditions:
The Speaker and Members of the Transitional Legislative Council swear the following oath:
“I ………….. swear by Almighty God, as Speaker / member of the Transitional Legislative Council that I will be sincere and faithful in my loyalty to the Republic of Sudan, and that I will perform my duties and responsibilities with seriousness, trustworthiness and transparency for the advancement, prosperity and progress of the Sudanese people. I swear that I am committed, and will protect and preserve the Transitional Constitutional Charter, that I will observe the laws of the Republic of Sudan, and that I will defend the sovereignty of the country. I swear that I will work for its unity, that I will strengthen the pillars of democratic governance, and that I will protect the dignity and honor of the people of Sudan. With God as my witness.”
The General Intelligence Service is a uniformed agency that is competent on national security. Its duties shall be limited to gathering and analyzing information and providing it to the competent bodies. The law defines its obligations and duties. It is subject to the sovereign and executive authorities in accordance with the law.
Notwithstanding the general jurisdiction of the judiciary, military courts are established for the armed forces, Rapid Support Forces, police forces, and the General Intelligence Service to try their members in relation to their violations of military laws. This does not apply to crimes against civilians or relating to the rights of civilians over which the regular courts of the judiciary are competent.
The state undertakes to protect and strengthen the rights contained in this Charter and to guarantee them for all without discrimination on the basis of race, color, gender, language, religion, political opinion, social status, or other reason.
Every person has a fundamental right to life, dignity, and personal safety, which shall be protected by law. No person may be deprived of life arbitrarily.
People are equal before the law, and have the right to the protection of the law without discrimination between them on the basis of ethnicity, color, gender, language, religious faith, political opinion, racial or ethnic origin, or any other reason.
The state protects the rights of the child as provided in international and regional agreements ratified by Sudan.
No one may be subjected to torture or harsh, inhumane, or degrading treatment or punishment, or debasement of human dignity.
The right to litigate is guaranteed for all. No one shall be deprived of the right to resort to the justice system.
No one’s privacy may be violated. It is not permissible to interfere in the private or family life of any person in his home or correspondence, except in accordance with the law.
Every person has the right to freedom of religious belief and worship. They shall have the right to profess or express their religion or belief through worship, education, practice, performance of rituals, or celebrations, in accordance with the requirements of the law and public order. No one shall be compelled to convert to a religion they do not believe in or to practice rites or rituals they do not voluntarily accept.
Every citizen has the right to political participation in public affairs, in accordance with what is regulated by law.
The state guarantees the independence of universities and academic research centers, and freedom of thought and academic research.
The state undertakes to provide primary health care and emergency services free of charge for all citizens, to develop public health, and establish, develop and rehabilitate health and basic diagnostic institutions.
All ethnic and cultural groups have the right to enjoy their own private culture and develop it freely. The members of such groups have the right to exercise their beliefs, use their languages, observe their religions or customs, and raise their children in the framework of such cultures and customs.
Subject to Article 41 of this Charter, the rights and freedoms set forth in this Charter cannot be reduced. The Constitutional Court and other competent courts preserve, protect and apply this Charter, and the Human Rights Commission oversees its application in the state.
