WE, THE PEOPLE OF SURINAME,
inspired by the love for this Country and the belief in the power of the Almighty and guided by the centuries-long struggle of our people against colonialism, which was terminated by the establishment of the Republic of Suriname on 25 November 1975,
taking the coup d'ètat of 25 February 1980 and the consequences thereof,
conscious of our duty to combat and to prevent every form of foreign domination,
resolved to defend and protect the national sovereignty, independence and integrity,
assured of the will to determine our economic, social and cultural development in full freedom convinced of our duty to honor and to guarantee the principles of freedom, equality and democracy as well as the fundamental rights and freedoms of man,
inspired by a civic spirit and by the participation in the construction, expansion and maintenance of a society that is socially just,
determined to collaborate with one another and with all peoples of the world on the basis of freedom, equality, peaceful coexistence and international solidarity,
SOLEMNLY DECLARE, TO ACCEPT, AS A RESULT OF THE PLEBISCITE HELD, THE FOLLOWING CONSTITUTION.
The concern of the State is aimed at:
The social objectives of the State shall aim at:
Everyone shall have, in case of infringement of one's rights and freedoms, a claim to an honest and public treatment of his complaint within a reasonable time by an independent and impartial judge.
No person may be kept against his will from the judge whom the law assigns to him.
Loss of civil rights or the general forfeiture of all the property of an offender may not be imposed as a penalty or as a consequence of a penalty for any crime.
Everyone has a right to life. This right shall be protected by the law.
No one shall be obliged to do forced or compulsory labor.
Everyone has the right of freedom of religion and philosophy of life.
Everyone has the right to make public his thoughts or feelings and to express his opinion through the printed press or other means of communication, subject to the responsibility of all as set forth in the law.
Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful association and assembly, taking into consideration the rules to be determined by law for the protection of public order, safety, health and morality.
In case of war, danger of war, state of siege or state of emergency or for reasons of state security, public order and good morals, the rights mentioned in the Constitution may be submitted to limitations by law, which will be in force during a certain time, depending on the circumstances, in compliance with the international rules applicable in respect thereof.
The state shall take care of the creation of conditions in which an optimal satisfaction of the basic needs for work, food, health care, education, energy, clothing and communication is obtained.
Labor is the most important means of human development and an important source of wealth.
All employees have, independent of age, sex, race, nationality, religion or political opinions, the right to:
It is the duty of the State to indicate the conditions for work, remuneration and rest to which employees are entitled, especially by:
The associations for the defense of business entrepreneurs shall have the power to defend the rights and interests of those whom they represent and for whom they assume responsibility.
The right to strike is recognized subject to the limitations which stem from the law.
The State shall recognize and guarantee the right of all citizens to education and shall offer them equal opportunity for schooling. In the execution of its education policy the State shall be under the obligation:
In order to promote the socioeconomic development towards a socially just society, a development plan shall be determined by law, taking into consideration the national and socioeconomic goals of the State.
Natural riches and resources are property of the nation and shall be used to promote economic, social and cultural development. The nation has the inalienable right to take complete possession of its natural resources in order to utilize them to the benefit of the economic, social and cultural development of Suriname.
The structure of the financial system shall be regulated by law in such a manner that by saving and by the correct allocation of the necessary financial means, investments in the productive sector would be advanced.
The right to industrial property shall be regulated by law.
The social order shall be based in principle on a society, wherein all Suriname citizens have equal rights and obligations.
The State shall create the conditions, which underlie the education of citizens who are capable of participating in a democratic and effective manner in the development process of the nation.
The State shall save and protect the cultural heritage of Suriname, shall promote its preservation and promote the use of science and technology in the context of the national development aims.
A housing plan shall be determined by law, aimed at the procurement of a sufficient number of affordable houses and State control of the use of real estate for public housing.
The policy in relation to social security for widows, orphans, the aged, invalids and incapacitated workers shall be indicated by law.
The State shall take care to make the services of legal aid institutions accessible to those looking for justice.
the prerequisite that candidates proposed of the chamber of representatives shall be elected within the party structures;
Those persons shall be debarred from exercising the right to vote:
Eligible are the inhabitants who have Suriname nationality, who have reached the age of twenty-one and have not been deprived of the right to vote on the grounds mentioned in the previous article under (a) and (c).
Everything else relating to universal suffrage, the creation of an independent electoral council and its authority the division of Suriname in electoral districts, the repartition of seats in the National Assembly by electoral district and the methods according to which the allocation of seats takes place shall be regulated by law. This law shall be passed with a 2/3 majority.
The law determines for which functions the membership of the National Assembly shall result in the suspension from duty.
Repealed.
The sessions of the National Assembly and of the other representative organs on the local and district levels coincide as much as possible.
When assuming office the members shall make the following oath or promise:
“I swear (promise) that in order to be elected a member of the National Assembly I have not given or promised, nor will give or promise, directly or indirectly, under whatsoever name or pretext, anything to anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that in order to do or refrain from doing anything whatsoever in this office, I will not accept any promises or presents, directly or indirectly, from anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that I will fulfill the office of member of the Assembly conscientiously.
I swear (promise) that I will foster the well-being of Suriname to the best of my capacities.
I swear (promise) obedience to the Constitution and all other rules of law.
I swear (promise) allegiance to the Republic of Suriname. So help me, God Almighty (that I declare and promise).”
Within thirty days at the latest after the members of the National Assembly are chosen, this organ convenes under the chairmanship of the member most senior in years, and in case of unavailability or absence, always by the next eldest member. In this meeting the National Assembly shall examine the credentials of its new members, and shall settle disputes arising concerning those credentials or the election itself, according to rules to be laid down by law.
In the case where several members could be eligible for appointment as most senior member, who will act as chairman is decided by lot.
The Legislator, the Government and the other organs of government shall respect the rules of the Constitution.
The Legislative Power shall be exercised jointly by the National Assembly and the Government.
Without prejudice to what is reserved elsewhere in the Constitution for regulation by law, the following subjects shall certainly be determined by law:
The socio-economic and political policy to be followed by the Government shall be previously approved by the National Assembly.
The National Assembly has the following executive tasks:
The National Assembly shall have the right of amend bills proposed by the Government.
Every member to the National Assembly shall have the right to introduce proposals of law to the National Assembly.
The National Assembly shall have the right of examination, that is to be regulated by law.
Annually, and at the latest on the first working day of October, the President shall address the National Assembly on the policy to be followed by the Government.
All meetings of the National Assembly shall be held in public, except in special cases when it decides to convene behind closed doors.
The law regulates the financial provisions for the benefit of the members and former members of the national Assembly and their surviving relatives.
The speaker, the members of the National Assembly, the Government and the experts referred to in article 85, paragraph (2), shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for anything they have said at the assembly or have submitted to it in writing, except that if in so doing they had made public what was said or submitted under obligation of secrecy in a closed meeting.
The National Assembly is bound to inform the district councils in a manner to be laid down by law about decisions taken or viewpoints expressed that are of significance to their districts.
have reached the age of thirty;
not be excluded from the right of active and passive suffrage;
not have acted in violation of the Constitution.
At the inauguration, the President and the Vice-President shall make the following oath or promise:
“I swear (promise) that in order to be elected President (Vice-President) of the Republic of Suriname I have not given or promised, nor will give or promise, directly or indirectly, under whatsoever name or pretext, anything to anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that in order to do or refrain from doing anything whatsoever in this office, I will not accept any promises or presents, directly or indirectly, from anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that in fulfilling the office of President (Vice-President) I will attend to and foster, with all my powers, the interests of the county and the people.
I swear (promise) that I will defend and preserve, with all my powers, the independence and territory of the Republic of Suriname; that I will protect the general and particular liberty and the rights of all people and will employ, for the maintenance and promotion of the particular and general welfare, all means which the laws and circumstances place at my disposal, as a good and faithful President (Vice-President) should do.
I swear (promise) obedience to the Constitution and all other rules of law.
I swear (promise) allegiance to the Republic of Suriname. So help me God Almighty (That I declare and promise).”
The President and the Vice-President shall not hold other political and administrative offices in the civil service, shall not fulfill functions in trade and commerce or labor unions and shall not practice any other professions.
The President and Vice-President may neither directly or indirectly participate in any undertaking, nor act as guarantor thereof, which is based on an agreement for profit or gain made with the State or with a part thereof. They may hold no money claims, except for government bodys, against the State.
The President and the Vice-President may neither directly nor indirectly participate in any concession undertaking of any nature established in Suriname or operating therein.
The office President is exercised by the Vice-President:
The executive power is vested in the President.
The President shall have the supreme authority over the armed forces.
The President shall have the direction of foreign relations and shall promote the development of the international legal order.
Agreements with other powers and with organizations based on international law shall be concluded by, or by authority of, the President and shall be, insofar as the agreements require, ratified by the President. These agreements shall be communicated to the National Assembly as soon as possible; they shall not be ratified and they shall not enter into force until they have received the approval of the National Assembly.
The provisions of the agreements mentioned in Article 103 which may be directly binding on anyone, shall become effective upon promulgation.
Legal regulations in force in the Republic of Suriname shall not apply, if this application should be incompatible with provisions that are directly applicable to anyone, to agreements entered into either before or after the enactment of the regulations.
The law shall regulate the publication of agreements and of decisions of international organizations.
On proposal of the Government, the President confers honorary orders of the Republic of Suriname upon people who are eligible thereto.
The President shall have the right to grant pardons for penalties inflicted by judicial sentence. He shall exercise this right after having ascertained the opinion of the judge, who had taken the judicial sentence.
The President furthermore has the powers;
In international relations the President has the power:
All other matters relating to the President shall be regulated by law.
There is a Council of State, whose composition and powers shall be regulated by law. The President is Chairman of the Council of State.
On assuming office the members of the Council of State shall take the following oath or make the following promise before the President:
“I swear (promise) that in order to be appointed member of the Council of State, I have not given or promised, nor will I give or promise, anything, directly or indirectly, to anyone whomsoever, under whatsoever name or pretext.
I swear (promise) that in order to do or to refrain from doing anything whatsoever in this office, I will not accept, directly or indirectly, any promises or presents from anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that I will perform my duties and that I will not make public the things of which I have taken cognizance, through my appointment as member of the Council of State, and which are entrusted to me as secret, or of which I should understand the confidential character, except to those persons to whom I am obliged by law ex officio to communicate them.
I swear (promise) obedience to the Constitution and all other rules of law.
I swear (promise) allegiance to the Republic of Suriname. So help me, God Almighty (That I declare and promise).”
The Government draft state decrees. Provisions which are enforceable by penalties shall not be made by such state decree unless it is pursuant to the law. The law regulates the applicable punishment.
The manner of promulgation of laws and state decrees and the moment at which they became effective shall be regulated by law.
The meetings of the Council of Ministers may be attended by specialized and/or technical experts at the invitation of the chairman.
The Council of Ministers is under the obligation to assist in the procurement of information to the Council of State for the execution of its advisory and supervisory task.
Subject to that which is laid down in the Rules of Order of the Council, that Council of Ministers has as tasks:
The President may appoint to a ministerial department one or more Under-Ministers who, in cases the Minister deems necessary, may act as Minister in his stead, observant of his directions. The Under-Minister is on that account responsible to the President, without prejudice to the responsibility of the Minister.
On assuming office, the Ministers and Under-Ministers shall take the following oath or make the following promise before the President:
“I swear (promise) that in order to be appointed Minister (Under-Minister) I have not given or promised, nor will I give or promise, anything, directly or indirectly, to anyone whomsoever, under whatsoever name or pretext.
I swear (promise) that in order to do or to refrain from doing anything whatsoever in this office, I will not accept, directly or indirectly, any promises or presents from anyone whomsoever.
I swear (promise) that I will faithfully perform all the duties which the office of a minister lays upon me.
I swear (promise) that I will promote the well-being of Suriname to the best of my abilities.
I swear (promise) obedience to the Constitution and all other legal rules.
I swear (promise) allegiance to the Republic of Suriname. So help me, God Almighty (That I declare and promise).”
The law regulates the financial provisions for the benefit of the Ministers, the Under-Ministers, and former Ministers and former Under-Ministers and of their surviving relatives.
The standing orders for the Council of Ministers shall be determined by state decree.
There shall be a National Security Council, which can commence its activities after the duly authorized institutions have decided to declare the state of war, threat of war, or the state of siege in case of military aggression, and the state of civil and military emergency.
The Security Council shall consist of:
The Vice-President, as deputy chairman;
The Minister in charge of legal affairs;
The Minister in charge of defense;
Another member of the Council of Ministers;
The Commander of the National Army;
The Chief of Police of the Police Corps of Suriname.
The Security Council shall protect the sovereignty and the domestic security of the Republic of Suriname and is endowed with special powers with regard to the external and domestic security of the Republic of Suriname in case of war, danger of war or state of siege and other extraordinary circumstances, to be defined by the law.
Civil and commercial law, civil and military penal law and procedure shall be regulated by law in general codes, without prejudice to the power of the Legislature to regulate certain subjects in separate laws.
Insofar as the judge considers the application of a legal rule in the particular case brought before him to be contrary to one or more constitutional rights mentioned in Chapter V, the application in that case shall be declared unwarranted by him.
The law shall determine the organization, the composition and the jurisdiction of the Judicial Power.
The supreme instance of the Judicial Power entrusted with the administration of justice is called the Court of Justice of Suriname. The Court shall supervise the regular course and settlement of all lawsuits.
Those who hold political office shall be liable to trial before the High Court, even after their retirement, for indictable acts committed in discharging their official duties. Proceedings are initiated against them by the Attorney-General after they have been indicted by the National Assembly in a manner to be determined by law. It may be determined by law that members of the High Boards of State and other officials shall be liable to trial for punishable acts committed in the exercise of their functions.
If the President is of the opinion that one of the reasons for discharge as mentioned in article 142, paragraph (2) are present, he can suspend the person in question and he can also provide for a temporary replacement in that office. The law regulates the consequences of the suspension and discharge from the office.
The Public Prosecutor’s Office is to the exclusion of all other organs responsible for the investigation and is charged with the prosecution of all punishable acts. The law can derogate from this principle for the criminal procedure with regard to the military.
The Attorney-General supervises the correct execution of the tasks of the Police. He has the power to make any proposal that he considers practical in that regard.
The Government determines the general prosecution policy. The Government may in specific instances give the Attorney-General orders with regard to prosecution, in the interest of state security.
The chairman, the members and the deputy members are appointed by the President for a period of five years, on proposal of the National Assembly.
The organ mentioned in article 149 shall periodically, however at least once per year, report on the supervision it exercises to the National Assembly, the Council of State and the Government. The report shall be made public.
Other matters pertaining to the composition, the organization and the authority of this organ, shall be regulated by law.
One or more advisory councils for the benefit of the Government shall be created by a law, which will also contain rules on their appointment, composition, procedures and authority.
The democratic order of the Republic of Suriname comprises inferior government organs on the regional level, whose function, organization, competence and operation mode shall be regulated by law in accordance with the principles of participatory democracy and decentralization of administration and legislation.
The composition of the district councils shall be established after general, free and secret elections in the administrative jurisdiction of the district concerned. The seats in the district council are given to the representative political organizations with a seat in the local councils of the district concerned, in proportion to the total number of seats they acquired in the local councils.
The composition of the local councils takes place after general, free and secret elective franchise within the administrative jurisdiction. The order of election of the representatives is determined by the counting order of received personal votes. All available seats shall be so granted. Without prejudice to other legal requirements with regard to eligibility in representative bodies, the candidates for a local council or a district council shall have their main and real residence in the district or administrative jurisdiction.
The regional representative bodes and the regional administrative organs participate in the preparation, creation and the execution of the plans for district and administrative jurisdictions. Other specific tasks shall be regulated by law.
The financial provisions for the districts and administrative jurisdictions shall be determined by law; they envisage among other things to promote the reasonable and equitable division of funds in the districts.
The Government exercises supervision over the districts, in the manner and in the cases provided by law.
The district councils and local councils express the will and the aspiration of the inhabitants. The district councils shall manifest those to the National Assembly, whereas the local councils shall do so to the district councils.
The district councils shall be bound to inform the local councils about measures taken or opinions that are held, which concern the local councils. This obligation shall also apply to local councils in relation to the district council.
After the publication as mentioned in Article 170 everyone shall have the opportunity to lodge complaints against the district ordinances with the National Assembly.
The district administration is entrusted with the daily administration of the district.
Repealed.
The rules of the Constitution of 25 November 1975, the application of which was suspended on 13 August 1980, shall cease to exist when this Constitution becomes effective.
The legal regulations, such as they existed before this constitution shall become effective, including the laws and decrees promulgated after 25 February 1980, shall remain in force, until they will have been replaced by other rules according to this Constitution, under stipulation that they shall, insofar as they may be contrary to the Constitution, be brought in harmony with this Constitution, not later than by the end of the first period of session of the National Assembly, failing which they shall lose their force of law.
Repealed.
