Whereas We the People of the Kingdom of Swaziland do hereby undertake in humble submission to Almighty God to start afresh under a new framework of constitutional dispensation;
Whereas as a Nation it has always been our desire to achieve full freedom and independence under a constitution created by ourselves for ourselves in complete liberty;
Whereas various vusela consultations, economic and constitutional commissions, political experiments and Sibaya meetings have been established and undertaken in the last thirty years in search of a sustainable home-grown political order;
Whereas it has become necessary to review the various constitutional documents, decrees, laws, customs and practices so as to promote good governance, the rule of law, respect for our institutions and the progressive development of the Swazi society;
Whereas it is necessary to blend the good institutions of traditional Law and custom with those of an open and democratic society so as to promote transparency and the social, economic and cultural development of our Nation;
Whereas it is necessary to protect and promote the fundamental rights and freedoms of ALL in our Kingdom in terms of a constitution which binds the Legislature, the Executive, the Judiciary and the other Organs and Agencies of the Government;
Whereas all the branches of government are the Guardians of the Constitution, it is necessary that the Courts be the ultimate Interpreters of the Constitution;
Whereas as a Nation we desire to march forward progressively under our own constitution guaranteeing peace, order and good government, and the happiness and welfare of ALL our people;
Whereas the Constitution in draft form was circulated to the nation in both official languages, was vetted by the people at tinkhundla and Sibaya meetings;
Now, THEREFORE, WE, iNgwenyama–in-Council, acting together with and on the Approval of the Swazi Nation meeting as the Swazi National Council assembled at Ludzidzini this 4th day of October, 2004, hereby Accept the following Constitution as the Supreme Law of the Land.
commits the offence of treason.
The King and iNgwenyama shall be immune from taxation in respect of his Civil List, all income accruing to him and all property owned by him in any private capacity.
The King and iNgwenyama shall be immune from –
The King and Ngwenyama shall upon his installation as King and Ngwenyama take and subscribe an oath for the due execution of his office in accordance with Swazi law and custom.
shall, unless sooner released, be brought without undue delay before a court.
except with the free consent of that person first obtained.
except so far as, in respect of paragraph (c) or (d) that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority of that Government, local authority or body corporate is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority of that law is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
except so far as that provision or, as the case may be, the thing done under the authority of that law is shown not to be reasonably justifiable in a democratic society.
For the avoidance of doubt, the (common law) status of illegitimacy of persons born out of wedlock is abolished.
and may make such orders, issue such writs and make such directions as it may consider appropriate for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of any of the provisions of this Chapter.
unless, before the expiration of that period, the declaration is approved by a resolution passed by a two-thirds majority at a joint sitting of all the members of the Senate and the House.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, there shall be no derogation from the enjoyment of the following rights and freedoms -
“court” means a court of law having jurisdiction in Swaziland, but does not include, save in sections 15 and 17, a court established by a disciplinary law;
“disciplinary law” means law regulating the discipline of any disciplined force;
“disciplined force” means –
“member” in relation to a disciplined force, includes any person who, under the law regulating the discipline of that force, is subject to that discipline;
“period of public emergency” means any period so declared under section 36.
“property” means property, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, of any description whatever including Swazi nation land and any right or interest lawfully held by any person in that property.
A person who, on the commencement of this Constitution, is a citizen of Swaziland shall continue to be such citizen.
A person born, whether before or after the commencement of this Constitution and whether in or outside of Swaziland, is a citizen by descent if by birth that person is a descendant.
A child born after the death of the father shall be deemed to be a citizen under this Chapter on the same conditions as if the father were alive when that child was born.
A deserted child of not more than seven years found in Swaziland shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to have been born in Swaziland and shall be treated for the purposes of this Chapter as a citizen by birth.
and that on any of these grounds it is not conducive to the public good that the person should continue to be a citizen of Swaziland.
If a citizen of Swaziland who has attained the age of majority, or being a woman is or is about to be married, is or is about to become a citizen of another country and for that reason desires to renounce his or her citizenship of Swaziland, that citizen may do so by lodging with the Board a declaration of renunciation of that citizenship and, upon lodgement of the declaration or, if not then a citizen of that other country, upon becoming that citizen, he or she shall cease to be a citizen of Swaziland.
Where a person ceases to be a citizen of Swaziland that cesser shall not of itself operate to discharge any obligations, duty or liability undertaken, imposed or incurred before the cessation.
The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen to –
The King may, after consultation with the Prime Minister, assign to the Prime Minister or any other Minister responsibility for the conduct of any business of the Government including the administration of any department of Government.
Where the Prime Minister is absent from Swaziland or is by reason of illness or any other cause unable to exercise the functions conferred on the Prime Minister by this Constitution or any other law, those functions shall be exercised by the Deputy Prime Minster or where the Deputy Prime Minister is for any reason unable to exercise the functions of the office of the Prime Minister, by such other Minister as the King may authorize in writing for a maximum period not exceeding three months.
Where a Minister is absent from Swaziland or is by reason of illness or any other cause unable to exercise the functions of the office of that Minister the Minister may, after consultation with the Prime Minister, delegate those functions to another Minister in writing for a maximum period not exceeding six months.
A Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister or Minister shall, before assuming the duties of office take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath for the due execution of office as set out in the Second Schedule.
The system of government for Swaziland is a democratic, participatory, tinkhundla-based system which emphasises devolution of state power from central government to tinkhundla areas and individual merit as a basis for election or appointment to public office.
A person is not qualified to be registered as a voter or to vote where that person
The Parliament of Swaziland shall consist of a Senate and a House of Assembly.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, a person qualifies to be appointed, elected or nominated, as the case may be, as a Senator or a member of the House if that person –
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution .
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the power of the King and Parliament to make laws shall be exercised by bills -
A bill may be introduced in either chamber of Parliament except that
Except with the consent of the Cabinet signified by the Prime Minister or the Minister responsible for finance, neither chamber of Parliament shall -
the bill, with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both chambers, shall, unless the House otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent.
the bill, with such amendments, if any, as may have been agreed to by both chambers, shall, unless the House otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent.
Where the King by writing under his hand certifies to the President that enactment of a bill (including a money bill but not an appropriation bill) passed by the House, is a matter of urgency, the bill, having been sent to the Senate at least ten days before the end of the session -
the bill, with such amendments, if any, as may be agreed to by both chambers, shall, unless the House otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent.
but shall, unless the Senate otherwise agrees, be presented to the King for assent.
neither chamber shall proceed upon the bill and the bill shall be referred to a joint sitting of the Senate and the House in accordance with the provisions of the First Schedule.
but shall, unless the House otherwise resolves, be presented to the King for assent.
There shall preside at any meeting of the Senate .
There shall preside at any sitting of the House .
the King may refuse to dissolve Parliament; or,
to fill the vacancy under the same provisions of section 95 as the person whose seat has become vacant was appointed or elected.
to fill the vacancy under the same provisions of section 96 as the member whose seat has become vacant was nominated or elected.
Justice shall be administered in the name of the Crown by the Judiciary which shall be independent and subject only to this Constitution.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution or any other law, the Chief Justice as head of the Judiciary may make rules for regulating the practice and procedure of the superior and subordinate courts, including the specialised and local courts as well as powers of judicial officers.
A judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court shall not enter upon the duties of office unless that judge has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and the oath for the due execution of office as set out in the Second Schedule.
The High Court shall have and exercise review and supervisory jurisdiction over all subordinate courts and tribunals or any lower adjudicating authority, and may, in exercise of that jurisdiction, issue orders and directions for the purpose of enforcing or securing the enforcement of its review or supervisory powers.
those functions shall be performed by the most senior of the Justices of the Supreme Court.
The Commission shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.
In determining whether to initiate, continue or discontinue an investigation, the Commissioner shall exercise discretion and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of that discretion, the Commissioner may refuse to initiate or continue an investigation where it appears that -
The Commission shall not, in investigating any matter leading to, resulting from or connected with the decision of a Minister, inquire into or question the policy of the Government in accordance with which the decision was made.
(1) The Public Service of Swaziland shall be administered through service commissions or similar bodies established under this Constitution or any other law.
Every member of a service commission shall have such and like protection and privilege in the case of any action or suit brought against that member for any act done or omitted to be done in the honest execution of the duties of that member as is by law given to acts done or words spoken by a judge of the High Court in the exercise of the judicial office.
In the performance of its functions under this Constitution, a service commission shall be independent of and not subject to any Ministerial or political influence and this independence shall be an aspect of the exercise of any delegated powers or functions of the Civil Service Commission or any other service commission or similar body.
A person shall not in any legal proceedings be permitted or compelled to produce or disclose any communication, written or oral, which has taken place between a service commission or any member or officer of that service commission, and the Government, or a line Minister, or any officer of the Government, or between any member or officer of a service commission and its chairman, or between members or officers of a service commission, in exercise of, or in connection with the exercise of, the functions of a service commission, unless a judge of a superior court orders otherwise.
A member of a service commission or similar body shall not enter upon the duties of office until that member has taken and subscribed the oath of allegiance and the oath for the due execution of office as set out in the Second Schedule.
Any person appearing before a service commission or any person or body conducting an inquiry or investigation on behalf of a service commission shall be entitled to legal representation at the expense of that person.
Every service commission shall, as soon as possible after the end of each financial year, submit a report to the line Minister in respect of the discharge of its functions during the past year and the line Minister shall lay every such report before both Houses of Parliament for consideration during budget debates.
This Part applies subject to any express limitation or enlargement to all the service commissions or similar bodies established under this Constitution or any other law.
those benefits shall be granted and may not be withheld, reduced in amount or suspended unless the appropriate Commission concurs in the refusal to grant the benefits or, as the case may be, in the decision to withhold, reduce in amount or suspend those benefits.
who immediately prior to the appointment to that office (or where the person has held more than one such office in succession, to those offices) was not a public officer.
are not to be regarded as withdrawal of those monies from the Fund.
a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before the House and shall be included in a motion or motions seeking approval for the supplementary expenditure in such a manner as the House shall prescribe.
All minerals and mineral oils in, under or upon any land in Swaziland shall, after the commencement of this Constitution, continue to vest in iNgwenyama in trust for the Swazi Nation as vested on the 12th April 1973.
There shall be no private right of property in any water found naturally in Swaziland.
Parliament may make laws -
with a view to ensuring that a local government area is, or has the potential for becoming, economically sustainable.
Subject to any other law a local government has power-
The Government shall where necessary allocate funds and necessary expertise for the assistance of local governments.
The development programmes of a local government shall where appropriate be integrated into the national development plan to be mainly funded by the Government.
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall make provision for the constitution, powers, election, membership, vacation, qualification and regulations, accountability, auditing, control and supervision of local government authorities.
Umntfwanenkhosi Lomkhulu is a paternal uncle of the King selected and appointed in accordance with Swazi law and custom.
the Commonwealth,
the African Union,
the Southern African Development Community,
other international organizations of which Swaziland is a member.
The Leadership Code of Conduct seeks to ensure that those in leadership, whether elective or appointive -
A person who holds an office referred to in section 241 (2) shall not-
Parliament may make law –
In this chapter –
In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “public office” –
Where any power is conferred by this Constitution to make any order,  regulation or rule, or to give any direction, the power shall be construed as including the power, exercisable in like manner, to amend or revoke any such order, regulation, rule or direction.
A provision of this Constitution that a person or authority shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or authority in the exercise of any functions under this Constitution shall not be construed as precluding the High Court from exercising jurisdiction in relation to any question whether that person or authority has performed those functions in accordance with this Constitution or any other law or should not perform those functions.
“chamber” means a house of Parliament;
“the Commonwealth” means the countries that are independent members of the Commonwealth and territories for whose international relations any of those countries is wholly or in part responsible;
“financial year” means the period of twelve months ending on the thirty-first day of March in any year or such other day as may be prescribed;
“the Gazette” means the Swaziland Government Gazette;
“the Government” means the Government of Swaziland;
“high judicial office” means the office of a judge of a court of unlimited jurisdiction in civil and criminal matters in some part of the Commonwealth that may be prescribed or the office of a judge of a court having jurisdiction in appeals from such a court;
“the House” means the House of Assembly;
“law” includes any instruments having the force of law and any unwritten rule of law;
“Ndlovukazi” means a person appointed in terms of section 229 of this Constitution;
“Ngwenyama” means a person appointed in terms of section 228 of this Constitution;
“oath” means the oath of allegiance set out in the Second Schedule and also includes affirmation;
“Parliament” means the Parliament of Swaziland;
“prescribed” means prescribed in law or, in relation to anything that may be prescribed only by an Act of Parliament, it means so prescribed;
“public office” means subject to the provisions of section 254 any office of emolument in the public service;
“public officer” means subject to the provisions of section 254 the holder of any  public office and includes any person appointed to act in any public office;
“public service” means the service of the Crown in a civil capacity in respect of the government of Swaziland;
“session” means, in relation to Parliament, the sittings of Parliament commencing when the House first meets after this Constitution comes into force or when Parliament first meets after its prorogation at any time and terminating when Parliament is prorogued or is dissolved without having been prorogued;
“Sibaya” means the nation meeting as the Swazi National Council at the Ndlovukazi’s official residence for the purpose of deliberating or deciding on important national matters;
“sitting” means in relation to a chamber, a period during which that chamber is sitting continuously without adjournment, and includes any period during which the chamber is in committee;
“vusela” means a consultative process whereby a person or group of persons or community is visited and addressed with a view to soliciting opinion or consensus on some public matter.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government existing immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue in office and, as far as possible, exercise its powers and functions in such a manner and with such  modifications as are necessary to bring them into conformity with the provisions of this Constitution.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Parliament existing immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution shall continue in office and, as far as possible, exercise its powers and functions in such a manner and with such modifications as are necessary to bring them into conformity with the provisions of this Constitution.
The Court of Appeal and the High Court, in existence immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed, subject to such modifications as may be necessary, to have been established under this Constitution and shall perform the functions of the Supreme Court and the High court specified in Chapter VIII of this Constitution.
The first appointments to the following offices shall be made within six months after the commencement of this Constitution -
Where immediately before the commencement of this Constitution any existing law that had not been brought into force or was to come into force on a date subsequent to the commencement of this Constitution, that law may be brought into force in accordance with its terms or shall come into force on such subsequent date as the case may be.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Constitution, any person who immediately before the commencement of this Constitution held or was acting in any office established under or by virtue of the constitution then in force and who holds or is acting in an equivalent office under this Constitution, shall be deemed to have taken and  subscribed any necessary oath under this Constitution, in accordance with this Constitution.
Legal proceedings, including civil proceedings against the Government, pending before any court immediately before the commencement of this Constitution may be proceeded with and completed.
The public seal, the seals of the superior courts as well as any prescribed forms in use under any enactment in force immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall continue to be used until provision is otherwise made for them.
The prerogative of mercy of the King under section 78 may be exercised in respect of any criminal offence committed before the commencement of this Constitution as it may in respect of a criminal offence committed after the commencement of this Constitution.
Subject to the provisions of section 274 –
Where there is subsisting immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, a contract which has been entered into by or on behalf of Government, then on and after the commencement of this Constitution, all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government under the contract shall be vested in or, as the case may be, subsist against the Government, and the contract shall otherwise continue to be of full force and effect.
Where Swaziland or the Government was a party immediately before the commencement of this Constitution to any treaty, agreement or convention, such treaty, agreement or convention shall not be affected by the commencement of this Constitution, and Swaziland or the Government as the case may be, shall continue to be party to it.
(Oath or affirmation of allegiance)
I, ……………………………….. do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to King ……………………………, his heirs and successors, according to law.
So help me God. (To be omitted in affirmation.)
(Oath or Affirmation for due execution of office)
I……………………………………. do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will well and truly serve King ……………………………….., his heirs and successors, in the office of (here insert the description of the office).
So help me God. (To be omitted in Affirmation)
(Judicial oath or Affirmation)
I……………………………………… do swear (or solemnly affirm) that I will well and truly serve King……………………………, his heirs and successors, in the office of (here insert the description of the judicial office) and I will do right to all manner of people according to the law without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
So help me God. (To be omitted in Affirmation)
