We, the People of Syria, building on the centuries-long traditions of statehood, proceeding from the responsibility before the past, present and future generations, resolute in our decision to affirm freedom and justice, and confirming our commitment to the Charter of the United Nations Organization, the Charter of the League of Arab States, the Charter of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the Declaration of the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, solemnly declare our intention to do the following:
to ensure security, independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the state;
to live in peace and friendship with other peoples; to successfully establish a civil society;
to build a legal democratic state governed by the rule of law as expressed by the will of its people;
to ensure a decent standard of living for all in accordance with a just economic and social order.
In the name of the high intention noted above we adopt this Constitution by nation-wide referendum.
The State shall respect all religions and religious organizations, and ensure the freedom to perform all the rituals that do not prejudice public order. Religious organizations shall be equal before the law.
Everyone shall be obliged to pay legally established taxes and levies.
Any assault on individual freedom, on the inviolability of private life or any other rights and public freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution shall be considered a crime punishable by law.
The legislative authority is assumed on behalf of the Syrian people by the People's Assembly and the Constituent Assembly in the manner prescribed by the Constitution and applicable laws.
The People’s Assembly undertakes the following functions:
The President of the Republic and the Government of the Republic exercise executive authority on behalf of the people within the limits provided for in the Constitution.
A candidate for the presidency must be over 40 years of age and hold the Syrian citizenship.
Before assuming his duties the President of the Republic shall be sworn in before the People’s Assembly and the Constituent Assembly by saying the constitutional oath mentioned in Article 17 of the Constitution.
The allocations required for the office of the President of the Republic shall be set out in the budget.
The President of the Republic has the right to address letters to the People’s Assembly and the Constituent Assembly, as well as make statements before them.
The President of the Republic issues decrees, edicts and instructions in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
The President of the Republic might call for a referendum on important issues which affect the higher interests of the country. The result of the referendum shall be binding and come into force as of the date of its announcement by the President of the Republic.
The Prime Minister, his deputies and ministers are sworn in before the President of the Republic by saying the constitutional oath stated in Article 17 of the Constitution.
The mandate of the Government is as follows:
The People’s Assembly, the Constituent Assembly and the President of the Republic have the right to call for criminal prosecution of the Prime Minister, his deputies and ministers for acts committed by them while exercising authority. Bringing a member of the government before the court leads to his suspension from his office.
The Attorney General’s Office is the single judicial institution headed by the Minister of Justice. The law regulates its function and mandate.
The State’s Council is in charge of Administrative Judiciary. It is an independent judicial and advisory body. The law states its mandate and the status of The State’s Council members.
The Supreme Constitutional Court shall not consider the constitutionality of laws put to a referendum that have received the approval of the people.
Laws and other legal acts passed before this Constitution comes into force shall apply until amended in accordance with the Constitution. The respective amendments shall be made within no longer than one year from the date the Constitution comes into force.
The term in office of the current President of the Republic shall be 7 years from the swearing-in date. He has the right to run again for President of the Republic. The President’s term in office as stated in this Constitution shall apply to him as of the next presidential elections.
Elections for the first People’s Assembly under this Constitution shall be held after the term of the previous People’s Assembly expires.
The Constituent Assembly shall be formed within no more than one year from the date the Constitution comes into force.
The Constitution shall come into force on the day of its promulgation after the referendum.
