WE the people of Vanuatu,
PROUD of our struggle for freedom,
DETERMINED to safeguard the achievements of this struggle,
CHERISHING our ethnic, linguistic and cultural diversity,
MINDFUL at the same time of our common destiny,
HEREBY proclaim the establishment of the united and free Republic of Vanuatu founded on traditional Melanesian values, faith in God, and Christian principles,
AND for this purpose give ourselves this Constitution.
The Republic of Vanuatu is a sovereign democratic state.
The Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of Vanuatu.
Every person has the following fundamental duties to himself and his descendants and to others-
Except as provided by law, the fundamental duties are non-justiciable. Nevertheless it is the duty of all public authorities to encourage compliance with them so far as lies within their respective powers.
On the Day of Independence the following persons shall automatically become citizens of Vanuatu-
Every person who on the Day of Independence is a person of ni-Vanuatu ancestry and has the nationality or citizenship of a foreign state or the status of an optant shall become a citizen of Vanuatu if he makes an application, or an application is made on his behalf by his parent or lawful guardian.
Anyone born after the Day of Independence, whether in Vanuatu or abroad, shall become a citizen of Vanuatu if at least one of his parents is a citizen of Vanuatu.
A national of a foreign state or a stateless person may apply to be naturalised as a citizen of Vanuatu if he has lived continuously in Vanuatu for at least 10 years immediately before the date of the application.
Parliament may prescribe further conditions of the eligibility to apply for naturalisation and shall provide for the machinery to review and decide on applications for naturalisation.
Parliament may make provision for the acquisition of citizenship of Vanuatu by persons not covered in the preceding Articles of this Chapter and may make provision for the deprivation and renunciation of citizenship of Vanuatu.
The legislature shall consist of a single chamber which shall be known as Parliament.
then, the member must, within 12 months after the commencement of this article, notify the Speaker of Parliament in writing whether he or she is a member of, or supports, another political party, or is an independent member of the Parliament supporting the Government or the Opposition or neither.
There shall be a Principal Electoral Officer who shall be a public servant.
Parliament may establish committees and appoint members to them.
Unless otherwise provided proceedings of Parliament shall be held in public.
Treaties negotiated by the Government shall be presented to Parliament for ratification when they-
Parliament shall by law provide for the organisation of the Malvatumauri Council of Chiefs and in particular for the role of chiefs at the village, island and district level.
The head of the Republic shall be known as the President and shall symbolise the unity of the nation.
Any indigenous Vanuatu citizen qualified to be elected to Parliament shall be eligible for election as President of the Republic.
The President of the Republic may pardon, commute or reduce a sentence imposed on a person convicted of an offence. Parliament may provide for a committee to advise the President in the exercise of this function.
The Prime Minister shall be elected by Parliament from among its members by secret ballot in accordance with the rules in Schedule 2.
The Council of Ministers shall cease to hold office whenever the Prime Minister resigns or dies but shall continue to exercise their functions until a new Prime Minister is elected. In the case of the death of the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, or if there is no Deputy Prime Minister a Minister appointed by the President of the Republic, shall act as Prime Minister until a new Prime Minister is elected.
A Minister, including the Prime Minister, shall also cease to hold office-
Members of Parliament who are appointed Ministers shall retain their membership of Parliament.
Parliament shall provide for appeals from the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and may provide for appeals from such appellate jurisdiction as it may have to a Court of Appeal which shall be constituted by two or more judges of the Supreme Court sitting together.
Parliament shall provide for the establishment of village or island courts with jurisdiction over customary and other matters and shall provide for the role of chiefs in such courts.
The jurisdiction to hear and determine any question as to whether a person has been validly elected as a member of Parliament, the Malvatumauri Council of Chiefs, and a Provincial Government Council or whether he has vacated his seat or has become disqualified to hold it shall vest in the Supreme Court.
The function of prosecution shall vest in the Public prosecutor, who shall be appointed by the President of the Republic on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission. He shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or body in the exercise of his functions.
Parliament shall provide for the office of the Public Solicitor, appointed by the President of the Republic on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, whose function shall be to provide legal assistance to needy persons.
In urgent cases, the Public Service Commission may, after consulting the Ministers responsible for finance and public administration, make such a decision instead of the Prime Minister.
The Ombudsman shall not be subject to the direction or control of any other person or body in the exercise of his functions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, a leader means the President of the Republic, the Prime Minister and other Ministers, members of Parliament, and such public servants, officers of Government agencies and other officers as may be prescribed by law.
Parliament shall by law give effect to the principles of this Chapter.
The Council of Ministers may make regulations for dealing with a public emergency whenever-
Any citizen aggrieved by reason of regulations made by the Council of Ministers in accordance with Article 69 may complain to the Supreme Court which shall have jurisdiction to determine the validity of all or any of such regulations.
All land in the Republic of Vanuatu belongs to the indigenous custom owners and their descendants.
The rules of custom shall form the basis of ownership and use of land in the Republic of Vanuatu.
Only indigenous citizens of the Republic of Vanuatu who have acquired their land in accordance with a recognised system of land tenure shall have perpetual ownership of their land.
Parliament, after consultation with the Malvatumauri Council of Chiefs, shall provide for the implementation of Articles 73, 74 and 75 in a national land law and may make different provision for different categories of land, one of which shall be urban land.
Parliament shall prescribe such criteria for the assessment of compensation and the manner of its payment as it deems appropriate to persons whose interests are adversely affected by legislation under this Chapter.
Notwithstanding Articles 73 and 74 the Government may own land acquired by it in the public interest.
The Republic of Vanuatu, conscious of the importance of decentralisation to enable the people fully to participate in the government of their Provincial Government Region, shall enact legislation necessary to realize that ideal.
The legislation shall provide for the division of the Republic of Vanuatu into Provincial Government Regions and for each region to be administered by a Provincial Government Council on which shall be representatives of custom chiefs.
A bill for an amendment of the Constitution may be introduced either by the Prime Minister or any other member of Parliament.
A bill for an amendment of the Constitution shall not come into effect unless it is supported by the votes of no less than two-thirds of all the members of Parliament at a special sitting of Parliament at which three-quarters of the members are present. If there is no such quorum at the first sitting, Parliament may meet and make a decision by the same majority a week later even if only two-thirds of the members are present.
A bill for an amendment of a provision of the Constitution regarding the status of Bislama, English and French, the electoral system, or the parliamentary system, passed by Parliament under Article 85, shall not come into effect unless it has been supported in a national referendum.
Notwithstanding Chapter 6 the first President of the Republic shall-
The persons who immediately before the Day of Independence hold office as Chief Minister or any other Minister shall as from that day hold office as Prime Minister or other Minister, as the case may be, as if they had been elected or appointed thereto under Chapter 7.
Notwithstanding Chapter 8, any person who immediately before the Day of Independence holds office as a judge of the pre Independence Supreme Court or of a District Court shall as from that day act in the office of judge of the Supreme Court until a substantive appointment is made to that office in accordance with Chapter 8. The President of the Republic may appoint one of them to act as Chief Justice until a substantive appointment is made to that office.
After the general elections next following the Exchange of Notes providing for the entry into force of this Article, the Representative Assembly shall set up a Committee with equal representation of all political groups to make recommendations on an electoral system based on Article 17(1).
The recommendations of the Committee shall be included in a law enacted by Parliament by a two-thirds majority of its members at a special sitting of Parliament when at least three-fourths of the members are present. If there is no such quorum at the first sitting, Parliament may meet and make a decision by the same majority a week later even if only two thirds of the members are present.
All legal proceedings, whether civil or criminal, pending immediately before the Day of Independence before any court in Vanuatu shall be disposed of on and after that day in accordance with general or specific directions given by the Supreme Court subject to any law which may be enacted for that purpose.
