We the people of Zimbabwe,
United in our diversity by our common desire for freedom, justice and equality, and our heroic resistance to colonialism, racism and all forms of domination and oppression,
Exalting and extolling the brave men and women who sacrificed their lives during the Chimurenga / Umvukela and national liberation struggles,
Honouring our forebears and compatriots who toiled for the progress of our country,
Recognising the need to entrench democracy, good, transparent and accountable governance and the rule of law,
Reaffirming our commitment to upholding and defending fundamental human rights and freedoms,
Acknowledging the richness of our natural resources,
Celebrating the vibrancy of our traditions and cultures,
Determined to overcome all challenges and obstacles that impede our progress,
Cherishing freedom, equality, peace, justice, tolerance, prosperity and patriotism in search of new frontiers under a common destiny,
Acknowledging the supremacy of Almighty God, in whose hands our future lies,
Resolve by the tenets of this Constitution to commit ourselves to build a united, just and prosperous nation, founded on values of transparency, equality, freedom, fairness, honesty and the dignity of hard work,
And, imploring the guidance and support of Almighty God, hereby make this Constitution and commit ourselves to it as the fundamental law of our beloved land.
Zimbabwe is a unitary, democratic and sovereign republic.
Zimbabwe has a National Flag, a National Anthem, a Coat of Arms and a Public Seal, which are set out in the First Schedule.
The tiers of government in Zimbabwe are--
The State must promote public awareness of this Constitution, in particular by--
The State and every person, including juristic persons, and every institution and agency of government at every level, must promote national unity, peace and stability.
The State must take all practical measures to protect the fundamental rights and freedoms enshrined in Chapter 4 and to promote their full realisation and fulfilment.
The State must--
The State and all institutions and agencies of government at every level must protect and foster the institution of the family and in particular must endeavour, within the limits of the resources available to them, to adopt measures for--
The State must take appropriate measures to ensure that--
The State and all institutions and agencies of government at every level must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within the limits of the resources available to them, to enable every person to have access to adequate shelter.
The State must take all practical measures, within the limits of the resources available to it, to provide social security and social care to those who are in need.
The State must take all practical measures, within the limits of the resources available to it, to provide legal representation in civil and criminal cases for people who need it and are unable to afford legal practitioners of their choice.
The State must take all practical measures to encourage sporting and recreational activities, including the provision of sporting and recreational facilities for all people.
The State must take measures to preserve, protect and promote indigenous knowledge systems, including knowledge of the medicinal and other properties of animal and plant life possessed by local communities and people.
The State must ensure that all international conventions, treaties and agreements to which Zimbabwe is a party are incorporated into domestic law.
Subject to section 36(2), persons born outside Zimbabwe are Zimbabwean citizens by descent if, when they were born--
and the birth is registered in Zimbabwe in accordance with the law relating to the registration of births.
Zimbabwean citizenship is not lost through marriage or the dissolution of marriage.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the establishment of a Citizenship and Immigration Board consisting of a chairperson and at least two other members, appointed by the President, to be responsible for--
An Act of Parliament may make provision, consistent with this Chapter, for--
The State and every person, including juristic persons, and every institution and agency of the government at every level must respect, protect, promote and fulfil the rights and freedoms set out in this Chapter.
in addition to considering all other relevant factors that are to be taken into account in the interpretation of a Constitution.
This Chapter does not preclude the existence of other rights and freedoms that may be recognised or conferred by law, to the extent that they are consistent with this Constitution.
and must be informed of this right promptly;
and who is not released must be brought before a court as soon as possible and in any event not later than forty-eight hours after the arrest took place or the detention began, as the case may be, whether or not the period ends on a Saturday, Sunday or public holiday.
and the High Court may make whatever order is appropriate in the circumstances.
Every person has inherent dignity in their private and public life, and the right to have that dignity respected and protected.
Every person has the right to bodily and psychological integrity, which includes the right--
No person may be subjected to physical or psychological torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
No person may be subjected to slavery or servitude.
No person may be made to perform forced or compulsory labour.
Every person has the right to privacy, which includes the right not to have--
Every person has the right to demonstrate and to present petitions, but these rights must be exercised peacefully.
Every person has the right--
but no person exercising these rights may do so in a way that is inconsistent with this Chapter.
Every person has the right to choose and carry on any profession, trade or occupation, but the practice of a profession, trade or occupation may be regulated by law.
"property" means property of any description and any right or interest in property.
and to apply to the court for an order directing the prompt payment of any compensation.
"land" includes anything permanently attached to or growing on land;
"piece of agricultural land" means a piece of agricultural land registered as a separate piece of land in a Deeds Registry.
the land, right or interest may be compulsorily acquired by the State by notice published in the Gazette identifying the land, right or interest, whereupon the land, right or interest vests in the State with full title with effect from the date of publication of the notice.
continues to be vested in the State, and no compensation is payable in respect of its acquisition except for improvements effected on it before its acquisition.
and accordingly--
No person may be evicted from their home, or have their home demolished, without an order of court made after considering all the relevant circumstances.
Every person has the right to--
and the State must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within the limits of the resources available to it, to achieve the progressive realisation of this right.
to the prompt provision of a birth certificate;
People over the age of seventy years have the right--
and the State must take reasonable legislative and other measures, within the limits of the resources available to it, to achieve the progressive realisation of this right.
The State must take appropriate measures, within the limits of the resources available to it, to ensure that persons with disabilities realise their full mental and physical potential, including measures--
are entitled to due recognition for their contribution to the liberation of Zimbabwe, and to suitable welfare such as pensions and access to basic health care.
is entitled to approach a court, alleging that a fundamental right or freedom enshrined in this Chapter has been, is being or is likely to be infringed, and the court may grant appropriate relief, including a declaration of rights and an award of compensation.
The President is the Head of State and Government and the Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Forces.
and, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, their terms of office are five years and coterminous with the life of Parliament.
should be investigated in terms of this section.
the President or Vice-President thereupon ceases to hold office.
The Vice-Presidents assist the President in the discharge of his or her functions and perform any other functions, including the administration of any Ministry, department or Act of Parliament, that the President may assign to them.
The President and Vice-Presidents, and any former President or Vice-President, must not, directly or indirectly, hold any other public office or be employed by anyone else while they are in office or are receiving a pension from the State as former President or Vice-President, as the case may be.
otherwise it is regarded as lost.
and may impose conditions on any such pardon, respite, substitution or suspension.
and the Attorney-General may exercise those functions in person or through subordinate officers acting under the Attorney-General's general or specific instructions.
The President may at any time remove the Attorney-General from office.
The Legislature of Zimbabwe consists of Parliament and the President acting in accordance with this Chapter.
Parliament consists of the Senate and the National Assembly.
unless he or she is disqualified under subsection (4) or (5).
unless he or she is disqualified under subsection (4) or (5).
unless he or she is disqualified under subsection (2) or (3).
and sentenced to imprisonment for six months or more without the option of a fine or without the option of any other non-custodial punishment, unless on appeal the Member's conviction is set aside or the sentence of imprisonment is reduced to less than six months or a punishment other than imprisonment is substituted;
in accordance with this Constitution.
and in either case the Speaker must cause the Bill to be presented to the President without delay for assent and signature and must give public notice of the date on which the Bill was sent to the President.
An Act of Parliament comes into operation at the beginning of the day on which it is published in the Gazette, or at the beginning of any other day that may be specified in the Act or some other enactment.
Parliament may, in an Act of Parliament, delegate power to make statutory instruments within the scope of and for the purposes laid out in that Act, but--
The Senate and the National Assembly must prescribe in Standing Orders the minimum number of Members who must be present for the conduct of business.
Parliament must--
but those measures must be fair, reasonable and justifiable in a democratic society based on openness, justice, human dignity, equality and freedom.
the President must by proclamation call and set dates for a general election to be held not more than ninety days after Parliament passed the resolutions or the President dissolved Parliament or Parliament stood dissolved, as the case may be.
Each House of Parliament determines the time and duration of its sittings, other than its first sitting, and its periods of recess, but--
On the dissolution of Parliament, all proceedings pending at the time are terminated, and every Bill, motion, petition and other business lapses.
but no such Act may permit Parliament or its Members or officers to impose any punishment in the nature of a criminal penalty, other than a fine, for breach of privilege or contempt of Parliament.
Parliament may sit at places other than the ordinary seat of Parliament, but only on grounds of public interest, security or convenience.
and must report to Parliament or to the Vice-President, Minister or authority, as the case may be, whether it considers any provision in the Bill, statutory instrument or draft contravenes or, if enacted, would contravene any provision of this Constitution.
At every election and referendum, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission must ensure that--
Whenever a vacancy occurs in any elective public office established in terms of this Constitution, other than an office to which section 158 applies, the authority charged with organising elections to that body must cause an election to be held within ninety days to fill the vacancy.
and to give effect to these considerations, the Commission may depart from the requirement that constituencies and wards must have equal numbers of voters, but no constituency or ward of the local authority concerned may have more than twenty per cent more or fewer registered voters than the other such constituencies or wards.
and the President must cause the preliminary delimitation report to be laid before Parliament within seven days.
Judicial authority derives from the people of Zimbabwe and is vested in the courts, which comprise--
but an Act of Parliament or rules of the Court may provide for interlocutory matters to be heard by one or more judges of the Court.
but the rules must give any person affected by the registrar's order or decision a right to have it reviewed by a judge of the Supreme Court, who may confirm it, amend it or set it aside or give any other order or decision he or she thinks fit.
The High Court is a superior court of record and consists of--
but the rules must give any person affected by the registrar's order or decision a right to have it reviewed by a judge of the High Court, who may confirm it, amend it or set it aside or give any other order or decision he or she thinks fit.
The Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court and the High Court have inherent power to protect and regulate their own process and to develop the common law or the customary law, taking into account the interests of justice and the provisions of this Constitution.
and is currently so qualified to practise.
Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, a person must not be appointed as a judicial officer of more than one court.
Appointments to the judiciary must reflect broadly the diversity and gender composition of Zimbabwe.
and is currently so qualified to practise.
and is currently so qualified to practise.
is vacant or if the office-holder is unable to perform the functions of that office, the next most senior judge of the court concerned acts as Judge President.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the appointment of magistrates and other judicial officers other than judges, but--
and a judge cannot be removed from office except in accordance with this section.
The Judicial Service Commission must conduct its business in a just, fair and transparent manner.
The law to be administered by the courts of Zimbabwe is the law that was in force on the effective date, as subsequently modified.
Only the following courts may exercise or be given jurisdiction in criminal cases--
and the State must take measures, including legislative measures, to promote these values and principles.
An Act of Parliament may limit the terms of office of chief executive officers or heads of government-controlled entities and other commercial entities and public enterprises owned or wholly controlled by the State.
An Act of Parliament must provide measures to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, including measures--
The President must appoint a Minister to be responsible for the Civil Service.
appointed by the President.
The President may appoint persons to be ambassadors or other principal representatives of Zimbabwe in other countries or to be accredited to international organisations and may, at any time, remove those persons from their posts.
An Act of Parliament must provide an effective and independent mechanism for receiving and investigating complaints from members of the public about misconduct on the part of members of the security services, and for remedying any harm caused by such misconduct.
The function of the Defence Forces is to protect Zimbabwe, its people, its national security and interests and its territorial integrity and to uphold this Constitution.
When the Defence Forces are deployed--
the President must cause Parliament to be informed, promptly and in appropriate detail, of the reasons for their deployment and--
The President must appoint a Minister to be responsible for the Defence Forces.
The President must appoint a Minister to be responsible for the Police Service.
The President must appoint a Minister to be responsible for any national intelligence service.
The President must appoint a Minister to be responsible for the Prisons and Correctional Service.
The following are the independent Commissions--
The independent Commissions have the following general objectives in addition to those given to them individually--
The independent Commissions have power to employ staff and, subject to the law, to regulate their conditions of service.
although they are accountable to Parliament for the efficient performance of their functions.
he or she ceases immediately to be a member of the Commission concerned.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission has the following functions--
and to ensure that those elections and referendums are conducted efficiently, freely, fairly, transparently and in accordance with the law;
In addition to the persons mentioned in section 320(3), the following persons are ineligible for appointment to the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission--
In addition to the report it is required to submit in terms of section 323, the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission must without delay, and through the appropriate Minister, submit a report to Parliament on the conduct of every election and every referendum.
in order to ascertain the conditions under which persons are kept there, and to make recommendations regarding those conditions to the Minister responsible for administering the law relating to those places.
The Zimbabwe Gender Commission has the following functions--
In addition to the report it is required to submit in terms of section 323, the Zimbabwe Gender Commission may, through the appropriate Minister, submit reports to Parliament on particular matters relating to gender issues which, in the Commission's opinion, should be brought to the attention of Parliament.
In addition to the report it is required to submit in terms of section 323, the Zimbabwe Media Commission may, through the appropriate Minister, submit reports to Parliament on particular matters relating to the media which, in the Commission's opinion, should be brought to the attention of Parliament.
The National Peace and Reconciliation Commission has the following functions--
In addition to the report it is required to submit in terms of section 323, the National Peace and Reconciliation Commission may, through the appropriate Minister, submit reports to Parliament on particular matters relating to national peace and reconciliation which, in the Commission's opinion, should be brought to the attention of Parliament.
Sections 234, 235, 236 and 237 apply to the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission and its members as if it were an independent Commission established by Chapter 12.
In addition to the report it is required to submit in terms of section 323, the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission may, through the appropriate Minister, submit reports to Parliament on particular matters relating to improper conduct in the public and private sectors which, in the Commission's opinion, should be brought to the attention of Parliament.
There is a National Prosecuting Authority which is responsible for instituting and undertaking criminal prosecutions on behalf of the State and discharging any functions that are necessary or incidental to such prosecutions.
The Prosecutor-General must submit to Parliament, through the appropriate Minister, an annual report on the operations and activities of the National Prosecuting Authority, the report being submitted not later than six months after the beginning of the year following the year to which the report relates.
An Act of Parliament may confer powers of prosecution on persons other than the National Prosecuting Authority, but those powers must not limit or conflict with the Authority's powers under this Part.
Whereas it is desirable to ensure:
there must be devolution of power and responsibilities to lower tiers of government in Zimbabwe.
whose boundaries are fixed under an Act of Parliament.
after consultation with the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission and the people in the provinces and districts concerned.
For the better exercise of their functions, provincial and metropolitan councils may establish committees but each such committee must be presided over by a member referred to in section 268(1)(f) or 269(1)(f), as the case may be.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the procedure to be followed by councils of local authorities.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the following, in accordance with the prevailing culture, customs, traditions and practices of the communities concerned--
An Act of Parliament must provide for the establishment, membership and procedures of an Integrity and Ethics Committee of Chiefs, to exercise the following functions--
In this Chapter "agricultural land" has the meaning given to it by section 72.
In order to redress the unjust and unfair pattern of land ownership that was brought about by colonialism, and to bring about land reform and the equitable access by all Zimbabweans to the country's natural resources, policies regarding agricultural land must be guided by the following principles--
continues to be vested in the State.
and the title deed to which it refers or is intended to refer, and any error whatsoever contained in such a notice, does not affect the operation of subsection (1) or invalidate the State's title to the agricultural land concerned in terms of that subsection.
Subject to this Constitution, any person who, immediately before the effective date, was using or occupying, or was entitled to use or occupy, any agricultural land by virtue of a lease or other agreement with the State continues to be entitled to use or occupy that land on or after the effective date, in accordance with that lease or other agreement.
The State must take appropriate measures, including legislative measures, to give security of tenure to every person lawfully owning or occupying agricultural land.
Subject to any limitation imposed by law, an owner or occupier of agricultural land has the right to transfer, hypothecate, lease or dispose of his or her right in agricultural land.
appointed by the President.
and those limits must not be exceeded without the authority of the National Assembly.
There is a Consolidated Revenue Fund into which must be paid all fees, taxes and borrowings and all other revenues of the Government, whatever their source, unless an Act of Parliament--
"public property" means any property owned or held by the State or any institution or agency of the government, including provincial and local tiers of government, statutory bodies and government-controlled entities.
In the exercise of his or her functions the Auditor-General is independent and subject only to the law.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the appointment of a board to employ persons to assist the Auditor-General in the exercise of his or her functions, and must also provide for--
to ensure transparency, honesty, cost-effectiveness and competitiveness.
An Act of Parliament must provide for the competent and effective operation of statutory bodies and, in particular, must ensure that their chief executive officers serve for limited periods whose renewal is dependent on the efficient performance of their duties.
This Part applies to the Commissions established by this Constitution, and to the members of every such Commission.
The Commissions are bodies corporate with perpetual succession and are capable of suing and being sued in their own names.
hold office at the pleasure of the President.
Parliament must ensure that sufficient funds are appropriated to the Commissions to enable them to exercise their functions effectively.
All constitutional obligations must be performed diligently and without delay.
"international treaty" means a convention, treaty, protocol or agreement between one or more foreign States or governments or international organisations.
does not bind Zimbabwe until it has been approved by Parliament.
"term-limit provision" means a provision of this Constitution which limits the length of time that a person may hold or occupy a public office.
The Sixth Schedule applies to the commencement of this Constitution, the repeal of the former Constitution and the transition to the new constitutional order established by this Constitution.
This Part applies to the interpretation of this Constitution unless the context otherwise requires.
Section 46 applies, with any necessary changes, to the interpretation of this Constitution apart from Chapter 4.
In this Constitution--
"administrative conduct" includes any decision, act or omission of a public officer or of a person performing a function of a public nature, and a failure or refusal of such a person to reach such a decision or to perform such an act;
"amend" includes vary, alter, modify, add to, delete or adapt;
"by-election" means an election to fill a casual vacancy in Parliament or in a local authority;
"Chief" means a Chief referred to in Chapter 15;
"Civil Service" has the meaning given to it by section 199;
"Commission" means a Commission established by this Constitution;
"Committee on Standing Rules and Orders" means the committee of that name established under section 151;
"Communal Land" means land set aside under an Act of Parliament and held in accordance with customary law by members of a community under the leadership of a Chief;
"Constitutional Bill" means a Bill which, if enacted, would have the effect of amending any of the provisions of this Constitution;
"Constitutional Court" means the Constitutional Court established by section 162(a);
"constitutional matter" means a matter in which there is an issue involving the interpretation, protection or enforcement of this Constitution;
"customary law" means the customary law of any section or community of Zimbabwe's people;
"disciplinary law" means a written law that regulates the discipline of members of a disciplined force, including part-time members, while they are rendering service in the force or in respect of their failure to render service in the force;
"disciplined force" means--
"effective date" means the date on which this Constitution comes wholly into operation in terms of paragraph 3(2) of the Sixth Schedule;
"Electoral Law" means the Act of Parliament that regulates elections in terms of this Constitution;
"financial year" means the twelve-month period ending on the 31st December;
"function" includes power and duty;
"Gazette" means the official Gazette of the Government and includes any supplement to that Gazette;
"general election" means a general election--
"Government" means the Government of Zimbabwe;
"government-controlled entity" means a body corporate whose operations or activities are substantially controlled by the State or by a person on behalf of the State, whether through ownership of a majority of shares in the body corporate or otherwise;
"House", unless otherwise qualified, means the Senate or the National Assembly;
"independent Commission" means a Commission referred to in section 232;
"judge" means a judge of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, the High Court, the Labour Court or the Administrative Court;
"Judicial Service Commission" means the Commission of that name established by section 189;
"law" means--
"legal practitioner" means a person who is permitted to practise the profession of law in Zimbabwe;
"local authority" means a council referred to in Part 3 of Chapter 14;
"member", in relation to--
"Member of Parliament" means a Senator or a Member of the National Assembly;
"metropolitan council" means a council established by section 269 for a metropolitan province;
"metropolitan province" means Bulawayo Metropolitan Province or Harare Metropolitan Province, as the case may be;
"Minister" includes a person exercising the functions of a Minister, whatever their title;
"national legislation" means an Act of Parliament or a statutory instrument made under an Act of Parliament;
"oath" includes affirmation;
"offence" means a criminal offence;
"period of public emergency" means a period when a declaration of a state of public emergency under section 113 is in effect;
"person" means an individual or a body of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated;
"President" means the President of Zimbabwe;
"President of the Senate" means the President of the Senate elected in terms of section 122;
"provincial council" means a council established by section 268 for a province other than a metropolitan province;
"public office" means a paid office in the service of the State;
"public officer" means a person holding or acting in a public office;
"security service" means a security service referred to in section 207;
"Senator Chief" means a chief elected to the Senate in terms of section 120(1)(b) or (c);
"sitting" means a period during which the Senate or the National Assembly is sitting continuously, including any period during which the Senate or the National Assembly, as the case may be, is in committee;
"sitting day" means any weekday which is prescribed in the Standing Orders of the National Assembly or the Senate, as the case may be, to be a sitting day, whether or not the House concerned meets on that day;
"Speaker" means the Speaker of the National Assembly elected in terms of section 126;
"Standing Orders", in relation to anything to be done by--
"statutory body" means--
"statutory instrument" means any instrument that has the force of law and that is made by the President, a Vice-President, a Minister or any other person or authority under this Constitution or an Act of Parliament;
"tax" includes a duty, rate, levy or due;
"traditional leader" means a person appointed as such in terms of section 283;
"Zimbabwe" means the Republic of Zimbabwe;
"Zimbabwe Electoral Commission" means the Commission of that name established by section 238;
"Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission" means the Commission of that name established by section 242.
Any reference in this Constitution, without qualification, to--
In this Constitution, words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
Tables of contents and headings to Chapters, Parts, sections and other provisions of this Constitution do not form part of the Constitution and are inserted for ease of reference only.
Whenever this Constitution refers to the holder of an office by a term designating the office, the reference includes a reference to any person who is lawfully acting in or exercising the functions of that office.
Where this Constitution requires a report or other document to be submitted to or laid before Parliament, the report or document must be submitted to or laid before both the Senate and the National Assembly.
and the person or authority is obliged to follow the advice tendered by the other person.
but the person or authority is not obliged to follow any recommendations made by the other person.
For the purposes of this Constitution, persons are not to be regarded as holding public office solely on the ground that they receive a pension, half-pay, retirement pay or some other similar allowance in respect of previous service in a public office.
is to be interpreted to mean that the number of votes must be not less than the whole number next above one-half, two-thirds or three-quarters, as the case may be, of the body's membership.
In the event of an inconsistency between different texts of this Constitution, the English text prevails.
[Depict the National Flag]
[Set out the National Anthem]
[Depict the National Coat of Arms]
[Depict the Public Seal]
In this Schedule--
"emergency law" means a written law that provides for action to be taken to deal with any situation arising during a period of public emergency;
"fundamental human right or freedom" means a right or freedom set out in Part 2 of Chapter 4;
"review tribunal" means the tribunal referred to in paragraph 3(1).
and must be informed as soon as reasonably practicable of their rights under this paragraph; and
After reviewing a detainee's case, the review tribunal must make written recommendations to the authority that ordered the detention as to whether or not the detainee should continue to be detained, and the authority must act in accordance with the tribunal's recommendation.
This Schedule is not to be construed as limiting a detainee's right to challenge in a court the lawfulness of his or her detention, whether or not his or her case is already before the review tribunal.
I, .............................................. swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to Zimbabwe and observe the laws of Zimbabwe.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the person specified in the appropriate legislation.
I, ............................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will serve Zimbabwe well and truly in the office of..........................................
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the person specified in the appropriate legislation.
I, .................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that as President [or Vice- President] of Zimbabwe I will be faithful to Zimbabwe and will obey, uphold and defend the Constitution and all other laws of Zimbabwe, and--
that I will protect and promote the rights of the people of Zimbabwe;
that I will discharge my duties with all my strength to the best of my knowledge and ability and true to the dictates of my conscience; and
that I will devote myself to the well-being of Zimbabwe and its people.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the Chief Justice or, in his or her absence, before the next most senior judge available.
I, .................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful to Zimbabwe and, in the office of Minister, will uphold the Constitution and all other laws of Zimbabwe; that I will give my advice to the President of Zimbabwe freely and to the best of my judgement whenever I am required to do so, for the good management of the public affairs of Zimbabwe; that I will not disclose, directly or indirectly, any secret that is debated in Cabinet or any secret that is entrusted to me in the course of my duties as Minister; and that in all respects I will perform the duties of my office faithfully and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the President or, in his or her absence, before the Chief Justice or the next most senior judge available.
I, .................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful to Zimbabwe and, in the office of Deputy Minister, will uphold the Constitution and all other laws of Zimbabwe; that I will give my advice to the President of Zimbabwe freely and to the best of my judgement whenever I am required to do so, for the good management of the public affairs of Zimbabwe; that I will not disclose, directly or indirectly, any secret that is entrusted to me in the course of my duties as Deputy Minister; and that in all respects I will perform the duties of my office faithfully and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the President or, in his or her absence, before the Chief Justice or the next most senior judge available.
I, .................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful to Zimbabwe, that I will uphold the Constitution and all other laws of Zimbabwe, and that I will perform my duties as a Senator/Member of the National Assembly [whichever is appropriate] faithfully and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the Chief Justice or in his or her absence, a Judge of the Constitutional Court.
I, ..................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful to Zimbabwe and that in the office of ......................................... I will uphold and protect the Constitution and will administer justice to all persons alike without fear, favour or prejudice in accordance with the Constitution and the law.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
Where the person taking this oath or affirmation is a judge, it is to be taken before the Chief Justice or the next most senior judge available. In all other cases it is to be taken before the person specified in the appropriate legislation.
I, .................................................... swear [or solemnly affirm] that I will be faithful to Zimbabwe and, in the office of member of the provincial [or metropolitan] council of the Province of ...................................................., [state name of province] will uphold the Constitution and all other laws of Zimbabwe; that I will give my advice to the Chairperson [or Mayor] of .................................................... [state name of province] freely and to the best of my judgement whenever I am required to do so, for the good management of the public affairs of the Province; that I will not disclose, directly or indirectly, any secret that is debated in the provincial [or metropolitan] council or any secret that is entrusted to me in the course of my duties as member of that council; and that in all respects I will perform the duties of my office faithfully and to the best of my ability.
So help me God. [To be omitted in affirmation]
This oath or affirmation is to be taken before the person specified in the appropriate legislation.
A person is disqualified to be registered as a voter--
In this Schedule "Money Bill" means a Bill that makes provision for--
Subject to this Constitution and Standing Orders--
the Bill may be presented to the President for assent and signature in the form in which it was passed by the National Assembly, except for minor changes required by the passage of time and any amendments on which the Senate and the National Assembly may have agreed.
contains provisions identical to those contained in that previous Bill, except for minor changes required by the passage of time, subparagraph (1) applies to the Bill as though the ninety-day periods in subparagraphs (a) and (c) of that subparagraph were periods of eight sitting days.
In this Schedule, unless inconsistent with the context--
"existing enactment" means a written law that was in force in Zimbabwe immediately before the effective date, whether as an Act of Parliament or a statutory instrument;
"existing law" means an existing enactment or any other law, whatever its nature, that was in force in Zimbabwe immediately before the effective date;
"first elections" means--
"former Constitution" means the Constitution of Zimbabwe that came into operation on the 18th April, 1980, as subsequently amended;
"publication day" means the day on which this Constitution, or the statute by which it is enacted, is published in the Gazette in accordance with section 51(5) of the former Constitution.
This Schedule prevails, to the extent of any inconsistency, over all other provisions of this Constitution.
come into operation on the publication day.
Subject to this Schedule, the former Constitution is repealed with effect from the effective date.
The boundaries of provinces, constituencies and wards as they were immediately before the publication day apply for the purposes of the first elections.
Any challenge to the validity of the first presidential election must be heard and determined in accordance with section 93 by the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe constituted under the former Constitution.
The first elections must be conducted in terms of an Electoral Law in conformity with this Constitution.
The Government constituted under this Constitution is in all respects the successor to the former Government of Zimbabwe.
Subject to this Schedule, all existing laws continue in force but must be construed in conformity with this Constitution.
The Standing Orders that were in force immediately before the effective date continue in force as standing orders of the Senate and the National Assembly until they are replaced or amended in accordance with this Constitution.
Any person who, immediately before the effective date, held or acted in a public office under the former Constitution continues to hold or act in that office, or the equivalent office under this Constitution, on the same conditions of service until the expiry of his or her term of office under those conditions of service or until he or she resigns, retires or is removed from office in terms of this Constitution or those conditions of service, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding any provision of the former Constitution, the following offices which existed on publication day in terms of Schedule 8 to the former Constitution, namely--
continue in existence until the effective date when the first President assumes office under this Constitution, and the persons who held those offices remain in them accordingly.
The funds which, immediately before the effective date, stood to the credit of the Consolidated Revenue Fund established by the former Constitution become the Consolidated Revenue Fund established by this Constitution.
and which, immediately before the effective date, is pending before the Supreme Court of Zimbabwe constituted under the former Constitution.
who must sit together as a bench to hear any constitutional case.
Provided that a vacancy in the office of Deputy Chief Justice occurring during that period must be filled in accordance with section 180(2) and (3).
but any such rules, in so far as they apply to the procedure of the Constitutional Court, must be consistent with section 85 and Chapter 8.
A vested or contingent right in regard to a pension benefit which existed immediately before the effective date and was protected by the former Constitution continues to exist and enjoy the same protection under this Constitution.
